Praise for Career Development and Counseling:
Putting Theory and Research to Work,
Second Edition
‘‘Outdoing even their excellent ﬁrst edition, Brown and Lent have strengthened the emphasis on scientiﬁcally-informed career practice and on issues
of diversity, individual differences, and social justice. This volume is an
essential resource for the library of anyone interested in the ﬁeld of career
development, assessment, and counseling and should also prove invaluable
for graduate students interested in immersing themselves in some of the best
work being done today in the ﬁeld of career development and counseling.’’
Nancy E. Betz, PhD
Professor, Department of Psychology
The Ohio State University
‘‘In this second edition, Drs. Lent and Brown continue to shape career
development discourse and illustrate the ongoing signiﬁcance of the ﬁelds
of career development and counseling in the 21st century. Woven into the
fabric of each chapter are multicultural and practice implications, addressing
the complex sociocultural issues salient in career development. This edition
will help both researchers and practitioners alike to better understand,
investigate, and promote the role of work in people’s lives.’’
Angela Byars-Winston, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine, School of
Medicine and Public Health
University of Wisconsin–Madison
‘‘This handbook is a great resource for the student, experienced practitioner,
and the researcher in the areas of career counseling and vocational psychology. The coverage of career development theory is detailed and current,
and the handbook provides a comprehensive review of approaches to the
practice of career counseling. I highly recommend this valuable contribution
to the literature.’’
Gail Hackett, PhD
Provost and Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs
University of Missouri, Kansas City

‘‘Career Development and Counseling is a must-have for any researcher in vocational psychology or career counseling or anyone who wishes to understand
the empirical underpinnings of the practice of career counseling. If you wish
to know why good career counseling works, this is the book for you.’’
Mark Pope, EdD, MCC
Professor and Chair, Department of
Counseling and Family Therapy
University of Missouri–Saint Louis
Former President, National Career
Development Association &
American Counseling Association
Editor, The Career Development Quarterly

Career
Development
and Counseling
Putting Theory and Research to Work

Second Edition

Edited by

Steven D. Brown
Robert W. Lent

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Cover image: © Roman Ponomarets/iStockphoto
Cover design: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If legal, accounting, medical, psychological or any other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all
instances where John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital
or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for more complete
information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-ondemand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Career development and counseling : putting theory and research to work /
edited by Steven D. Brown, Robert W. Lent.—2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-06335-4 (cloth)
ISBN 978-1-118-22222-5 (ebk.)
ISBN 978-1-118-23627-7 (ebk.)
ISBN 978-1-118-26097-5 (ebk.)
1. Career development. 2. Vocational guidance. 3. Counseling. I. Brown, Steven D. (Steven Douglas),
1947– II. Lent, Robert W. (Robert William), 1953–
HF5381.C265273 2013
331.702—dc23
2012017192
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Elaine and Ellen

Contents

Preface

ix

Contributors

xi

1

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the
21st Century
Robert W. Lent and Steven D. Brown

1

Section One MAJOR THEORIES OF CAREER DEVELOPMENT, CHOICE,
AND ADJUSTMENT

2

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment
Jane L. Swanson and Madalyn Schneider

29

3

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment
Margaret M. Nauta

55

4 The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers
Paul J. Hartung

83

5

Social Cognitive Career Theory
Robert W. Lent

115

6

Career Construction Theory and Practice
Mark L. Savickas

147

Section Two THE ROLE OF DIVERSITY, INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES,
AND SOCIAL FACTORS IN CAREER DEVELOPMENT, CHOICE, AND
ADJUSTMENT

7

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity
Mary J. Heppner

8

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice,
Development, and Adjustment
Nadya A. Fouad and Neeta Kantamneni

9 Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development
Cindy L. Juntunen, Saba Rasheed Ali, and Kipp R. Pietrantonio

187

215
245

vii

viii

Contents

10 Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Individuals
Jeffrey P. Prince

275

11

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment
Steven D. Brown and Andreas Hirschi

299

12

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development
Maureen E. Kenny and Mary Beth Medvide

329

13

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults
With Disabilities
Ellen S. Fabian and Roxanna Pebdani

Section Three

357

ASSESSMENT AND OCCUPATIONAL INFORMATION

14

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests
Jo-Ida C. Hansen

387

15

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values
James Rounds and Jing Jin

417

16 Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling
A. J. Metz and Janice E. Jones
17

18

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career
Choice and Development
Patrick J. Rottinghaus and P. Maggie Hauser
The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information
Paul A. Gore Jr., Wade C. Leuwerke, and Alexandra R. Kelly

449

477
507

Section Four COUNSELING, DEVELOPMENTAL, AND PREVENTIVE
INTERVENTIONS

19

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success
in Children and Adolescents
539
Sherri L. Turner and Richard T. Lapan

20

Promotion of Career Choices
Susan C. Whiston and Barbara Noblin James

565

21

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation
LaRae M. Jome and Susan D. Phillips

595

22

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance
Robert W. Lent and Steven D. Brown

621

23 Counseling Adults for Career Transitions
Becky L. Bobek, Mary Ann Hanson, and Steven B. Robbins

653

Author Index

683

Subject Index

695

Preface

T

Career Development and Counseling: Putting Theory and
Research to Work, like the ﬁrst edition, has as its primary goal the
promotion of scientiﬁcally informed career practices. It is, therefore,
intended to be helpful to a wide audience of students, practitioners, and
researchers who are interested in basing their work on the best that science
and theory have to offer—science and theory emanating directly from
vocational psychology as well as other disciplines that can inform career
practice.
This edition of the text maintains continuity with the ﬁrst edition in
several ways. First, Section One is devoted to major theories of career
development, choice, and adjustment that (a) either have received direct
empirical attention or are derived from other, well-studied theories and
(b) have clear implications for practice. Although the theories we include
have received varying amounts of research support, all have the potential
to generate new empirical knowledge as well as practical applications. As
in the ﬁrst edition, our goal was not to provide encyclopedic coverage of all
available theories, but rather to focus selectively on those that appear to be
empirically viable and useful in practice.
Second, this edition also includes separate sections devoted to the assessment of important career constructs and occupational information systems
(Section Three) and to interventions for working with career issues across the
life span (Section Four), which are mainstay topics of vocational psychology
and career development. Third, we asked authors to be selective, scientiﬁc,
and interdisciplinary in their coverage—to highlight assessment devices,
information tools, and interventions that have garnered some scientiﬁc support and that have clear implications for practice—and to incorporate literatures from other ﬁelds of inquiry (e.g., industrial/organizational psychology,
personality psychology) that can inform career research and practice.
Despite these continuities with the ﬁrst edition, this edition departs from
the earlier one in several important ways. The most prominent change in
this edition is that we have reconﬁgured Section Two to focus to a greater
extent than in the ﬁrst edition on the roles of diversity, individual differences,
and social factors in the career development process. This edition, therefore,
HIS EDITION OF

ix

x

Preface

contains separate chapters devoted to gender, race/ethnicity, social class
and poverty, sexual minority identity, disability status, personality, and
relational factors.
An additional change is that we now include an introductory chapter to
set the table for the book by deﬁning the purview of career development,
discussing the importance of career counseling in the 21st century, and
offering a brief history of career science and practice. This chapter is intended
to encourage students to see the unique role of work in people’s lives, its
interface with other life domains (e.g., family, education, leisure), and the
value of assisting people to surmount hurdles to occupational functioning. It
is also intended to dispel myths and biases that sometimes surface regarding
career counseling and to encourage a view of career development and
counseling as vital, relevant areas of scholarship and practice.
We also, frankly, wanted to improve this edition’s ability to speak directly
to practitioners. Although the ﬁrst edition, like this one, was developed
to promote scientiﬁcally based practices, the practice implications of some
chapters in the ﬁrst edition were not always sufﬁciently clear. Thus, we asked
all authors, regardless of speciﬁc topic, to think carefully about the practice
implications of their chapters and to end their chapters by summarizing in
a clear and concise way some of the most important practical take-home
messages of their chapters.
We have many people to thank for their help throughout this process. First,
we thank all of the students who have taken our courses and who continue to
shape our thinking about how to teach career development and counseling
in ways that are scientiﬁcally informed and useful to practitioners. Second,
we are grateful to have had a gifted group of contributing authors whose
chapters taught us a great deal and who were exceptionally open to editorial
dialogue. Third, we appreciated the valuable input we received at various
stages of the book from Ellen Lent and Mark Savickas, who served as
sounding boards for particular topics and provided feedback on some of
the chapters that we ourselves had authored. Fourth, we were grateful for
the superb help we received from Rachel Livsey, our editor at Wiley, and
her editorial assistant, Amanda Orenstein. Finally, we (as always) thank our
families, friends, and colleagues for their support and inspiration. We could
not have completed this edition of Career Development and Counseling: Putting
Theory and Research to Work without them.
Steven D. Brown
Robert W. Lent
March 30, 2012

Contributors
Saba Rasheed Ali, PhD
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA

Paul J. Hartung, PhD
Northeast Ohio Medical University
Rootstown, OH

Becky L. Bobek, PhD
ACT
Iowa City, IA

P. Maggie Hauser, MA
Southern Illinois University
Carbondale
Carbondale, IL

Steven D. Brown, PhD
Loyola University Chicago
Chicago, IL
Ellen S. Fabian, PhD
University of Maryland
College Park, MD

Mary J. Heppner, PhD
University of Missouri–Columbia
Columbia, MO
Andreas Hirschi, PhD
University of Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland

Nadya A. Fouad, PhD
University of
Wisconsin–Milwaukee
Milwaukee, WI

Barbara Noblin James, MEd
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN

Paul A. Gore Jr., PhD
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT

Jing Jin, MA
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL

Jo-Ida C. Hansen, PhD
University of Minnesota–Twin
Cities
Minneapolis, MN

LaRae M. Jome, PhD
University at Albany,
State University of New York
Albany, NY

Mary Ann Hanson, PhD
ACT
Iowa City, IA

Janice E. Jones, PhD
Cardinal Stritch University
Greendale, WI
xi

xii

Contributors

Cindy L. Juntunen, PhD
University of North Dakota
Grand Forks, ND

Kipp R. Pietrantonio, MA
University of North Dakota
Grand Forks, ND

Neeta Kantamneni, PhD
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE

Jeffrey P. Prince, PhD
University of California,
Berkeley
Berkeley, CA

Alexandra R. Kelly, MS.Ed
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT
Maureen E. Kenny, PhD
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
Richard T. Lapan, PhD
University of
Massachusetts–Amherst
Amherst, MA
Robert W. Lent, PhD
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
Wade C. Leuwerke, PhD
Drake University
Des Moines, IA
Mary Beth Medvide, MA
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
A. J. Metz, PhD
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT
Margaret M. Nauta, PhD
Illinois State University
Normal, IL
Roxanna Pebdani, PhD
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
Susan D. Phillips, PhD
University at Albany,
State University of New York
Albany, NY

Steven B. Robbins, PhD
ETS
Princeton, NJ
Patrick J. Rottinghaus, PhD
Southern Illinois University
Carbondale
Carbondale, IL
James Rounds, PhD
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
Mark L. Savickas, PhD
Northeast Ohio Medical
University
Rootstown, OH
Madalyn Schneider, MA
Southern Illinois University
Carbondale
Carbondale, IL
Jane L. Swanson, PhD
Southern Illinois University
Carbondale
Carbondale, IL
Sherri L. Turner, PhD
University of Minnesota–Twin
Cities
Minneapolis, MN
Susan C. Whiston, PhD
0 Indiana University
Bloomington, IN

CHAPTER 1

Understanding and Facilitating
Career Development in the
21st Century
ROBERT W. LENT AND STEVEN D. BROWN

W

HY DO PEOPLE WORK? What role does it play in our lives? Why should

counselors and psychologists focus on work behavior? What do
they have to offer people who are in the process of preparing to
enter the world of work, adjusting to the workplace, experiencing problems
or major changes in their work lives, or preparing to leave the work role?
How does work relate to other life roles? Should work be seen as an
impediment or as a complement to involvement in family and other life
domains? Is counseling for work issues any different than counseling for
other issues?
These are all questions that captivate and challenge those who study work
behavior from a psychological perspective or who seek to assist students,
workers, and retirees in the process of preparing for, entering, surviving
or thriving within, or exiting from the work world. Not surprisingly, such
questions form the foundation of this book, which is aimed at introducing
students (and reacquainting professionals) in the helping professions with
the literature on career development and counseling. This literature includes
foundational and evolving theories of work and career behavior, research
on a host of work-related constructs, and efforts to translate theory and
research into practical efforts to help people experience optimally satisfying
and successful work lives.
This chapter is designed to set the stage for the rest of the book by brieﬂy
considering the role of work in people’s lives, sketching the conceptual and
professional boundaries of career development and counseling, discussing
1

2

Career Development and Counseling

some of the myths and realities that surround the ﬁeld, and describing
its historical context and contemporary challenges. Our primary goal is to
convince the reader that work and career is one of the most important
domains of life that counselors and psychologists can study—and that it
is also one of the most meaningful targets of intervention in our roles as
counselors, therapists, educators, and advocates. Freud was said to have
equated mental health with the capacity to love and to work. Although
these capacities may not truly be sufﬁcient to deﬁne mental health, it is clear
that work has a central location in many people’s lives—one that frequently
intersects with other life roles and that can have an immense impact on one’s
overall quality of life.
WHY DO PEOPLE WORK?
It seems ﬁtting to begin by considering the reasons that people work and the
various roles that work can play in their lives. At ﬁrst glance, the question
of why people work may seem silly or moot—the sort that only academics
perched up in their ivory towers might ask. People work because they have
to, don’t they? They need the money that work provides to put food on the
table and a roof over their heads. This may be true for most adults, but work
as a means of survival does not tell the whole story, at least not for everyone.
As the old saying goes, people do not live by bread alone.
Working to Live or Living to Work? The Differing Roles
of Work in People’s Lives
In this section, we brieﬂy consider various sources of work motivation.
Work as need fulﬁllment. One way to view the question of why people work
is through the lens of Abraham Maslow’s (1943) famous hierarchy, where
human needs range from those that focus on basic survival (e.g., the need
for food) all the way to self-actualization (e.g., the need to realize one’s
inner potential). Maslow’s hierarchy is often pictured as a pyramid, with
more basic needs (e.g., food, safety, security) at the bottom. In this view, the
satisfaction of basic needs provides a foundation for meeting higher-order
social and psychological needs, such as friendship, intimacy, self-esteem,
and personal growth.
One of the problems in applying such a needs hierarchy to work motivation
is that it may be used to imply that some reasons to work are somehow nobler
or loftier than others or that poor people work only because they have to (i.e.,
to survive) while those better-off work because they want to (i.e., to satisfy
higher-order needs). To avoid such a bind, one can simply view Maslow’s

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

3

needs as reﬂecting a range or list of reasons why people work, without the
added assumption that they are necessarily hierarchical in nature. Thus, in
addition to meeting basic survival needs, work can provide the context for
fulﬁlling (at least a portion of) one’s needs for security (e.g., enhancing the
material comfort of one’s family), social belonging and intimacy, personal
esteem (e.g., providing a sense of personal worth and accomplishment),
purpose, and self-actualization. People may be motivated to work for any
combination of these reasons; they are not mutually exclusive or necessarily
hierarchical, except to the extent that basic survival is obviously a prerequisite
for fulﬁlling other needs. Rounds and Jin (Chapter 15, this volume) provide
a more complete consideration of work needs and values, including their
role in the selection of particular forms of work.
Work as an individual’s public identity. Beyond Maslow’s hierarchy and the
issue of need fulﬁllment per se, work may also serve other, perhaps less
obvious roles in people’s lives, particularly if we expand the question to
‘‘what do people get from working?’’ and if we highlight the role of culture
in work. For example, tied to the esteem and self-actualization bases of work
is the issue of identity, which can have both public and private signiﬁcance.
Perhaps particularly in individualistic or Western societies, work can be
seen as an expression of one’s public image. Note how often people in the
United States ask each other, ‘‘What do you do?’’ (i.e., what form of work
do you do?) when they meet someone new. One’s occupation can be a
shorthand way of announcing one’s social address (e.g., education, social
class, prestige). Fair or not, what one does for a living is often viewed as an
essential part of who one is as a person.
Work as personal identity or self-construction. Work-as-identity can also be
an expression of self-image, a means through which people ‘‘implement
a self-concept,’’ in the words of Donald Super (Super, Savickas, & Super,
1996, p. 139). This may be most obvious in artistic forms of work. For
example, we typically think of artists as expressing themselves through the
things they create. But self-expression or, more expansively, using work to
become the sort of person one imagines—to construct a self—can be a potent
source of motivation in any form of work. Taking Super’s thoughts about
work motivation a step further, Edward Bordin, another inﬂuential career
writer, emphasized people’s capacity to seek work that they ﬁnd intrinsically
interesting or from which they can derive pleasure. To illustrate his point,
Bordin (1994, p. 54) asked, ‘‘Is a professional athlete working or playing?’’
Such views of work motivation are sometimes criticized with the argument
that many people are not free to choose work that expresses anything more

4

Career Development and Counseling

than the need for a paycheck or that not everyone is lucky enough to be able
to do work that is pleasurable. One may ask whether those who work for
a minimum wage, in unskilled jobs, in fast-food restaurants, on assembly
lines, or in coal mines have the luxury of ‘‘playing’’ at, or implementing their
self-concepts through, work. There is little question that lack of economic
resources can limit one’s choice of work or that jobs may differ in their
obvious outlets for self-expression.
However, it is not hard to think of less afﬂuent persons who ﬁnd meaning,
dignity, and enjoyment in their work. The notions of work as a calling (e.g.,
as a way to help others or to serve a higher power) or as an opportunity
to construct and tell one’s life story (Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume)
capture the sense that work can play extremely valuable, self-deﬁning roles
in people’s lives, regardless of social class and even when performed under
difﬁcult or harsh conditions. One can easily, from an external perspective, see
someone else’s life story as mundane, boring, or marked only by exploitation.
However, that same story may be far more intriguing and meaningful to the
person who is living it.
Work as normative expectation, group identity, and social contribution. In more
collectivist cultures, work may be seen as an expression of group as well
as personal identity. For example, choice of work may be made less on a
personal basis and more in collaboration with members of one’s family, tribe,
or community. Consideration may be given to the needs of the collective
and to selecting work that serves (and reﬂects positively on) the group
and preserves relational harmony. Such functions of work may be seen,
perhaps, as extensions of Maslow’s (1943) focus on security, social, esteem,
and actualization needs—but with the focus on beneﬁts for the group rather
than for the self alone.
Of course, prevailing social norms in most societies maintain that one
must work if one is able to do so. It is a strong expectation conveyed
by social agents in the family, school, and other social institutions. This
norm is well-captured by the early rock-and-roll hit ‘‘Get a Job,’’ in which
the singer comically bemoans the social pressure to ﬁnd work. Indeed,
those who fail to ﬁnd work are often derided with labels such as bum,
shirker, lazy, good-for-nothing, or couch potato—especially if their failure
to ﬁnd work is attributed to their character or to a lack of effort. The
power of this social norm can be seen in the internalized anger, frustration,
and other adverse reactions unemployed persons often experience. This
normative aspect of work may be seen as a special instance of Maslow’s social
belongingness need.

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

5

Work as existential response and aid to mental health. From an existential point
of view, work may be seen as a way to structure one’s time and construct
personal meaning in an otherwise meaningless universe. Kierkegaard, the
famous philosopher, spoke of work as a means by which people may ﬁnd
distraction from their self-consciousness, especially from thoughts of their
own mortality. Although perhaps not the most upbeat idea, such a view
of work may nevertheless help to explain why some people become so
heavily invested in their work, sometimes to the point of work addiction,
and why many become depressed when the loss of the work role, either
through involuntary layoff or retirement, erodes their sense of life structure
or meaning. Several social problems, like delinquency, may also stem partly
from, or be exacerbated by, lack of access to suitable work. The old adage
‘‘an idle mind is the devil’s workshop’’ captures the value of work as a way
to structure time, maintain mental health, and promote prosocial behavior.
The concept of psychological ‘‘ﬂow’’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) demonstrates
how pleasurable it can be to become so absorbed in one’s work activities
that one becomes oblivious to the passage of time or to one’s own sense of
self-awareness.
In sum, people work for a variety of reasons, especially to earn a living,
honor and contribute to their families and communities, achieve self-growth,
establish a public identity, and structure their lives. Many of the ideas we
have presented on why people work or what they derive from working
can really be reduced to two venerable philosophical positions. In the
hedonic view, people are motivated to survive and to experience as much
personal pleasure (and to avoid as much pain) as possible. This position
subsumes Maslow’s survival, security, and esteem (and, perhaps, love and
belongingness) needs. In the eudaimonic view, people are motivated to ‘‘live
the good life,’’ not merely the ‘‘happy life.’’ Doing good is elevated above
feeling good. A premium is placed on approaching work as an opportunity to
achieve growth, purpose, meaning, and social contribution. The eudaimonic
position subsumes Maslow’s focus on aesthetic and cognitive needs (e.g.,
knowledge, goodness, justice) and self-actualization (or developing one’s
inner potential).
Work Vis-à-Vis Other Life Domains and Roles
Paid work is but one of life’s domains, though it is the focal point of
many people’s waking lives—if not in terms of psychological investment,
then at least in terms of hours spent. Assuming an 8-hour workday, many
full-time workers spend at least a third of most weekdays at work—as
much or more time as they spend sleeping or engaged in just about any

6

Career Development and Counseling

other activity. And this estimate does not include the many additional
hours or days that some people put into their work, above and beyond the
traditional workweek. If work accounts for a third of a typical workday
and sleep accounts for another third, that means all other activities (e.g.,
leisure, parenting, volunteering) are compressed into the remaining third or
are put off until the weekend—assuming that one is not doing paid work
then, too. Many people also think about their work when they are not at
work. It is no wonder, then, that work can be seen as having the potential
to conﬂict with or overshadow other life roles, like family members. Yet
psychological research increasingly acknowledges that work and other life
roles also have the potential to enrich one another (see Heppner, Chapter 7,
this volume.)
Super was perhaps the ﬁrst vocational theorist to view career development
in the context of other life domains or roles and note that, in addition to their
roles as workers, people can be invested in student, family, romantic, leisure,
volunteer, and other life roles. Because work can interface with these other
roles, it makes sense to reframe career planning as life-career planning or ‘‘life
design’’ (Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume). Such a broadened view suggests
that people consider how central or peripheral a role paid work will play in
their lives. It also opens the door to extending interventions, for example, to
those who perform unpaid work or who wish to enrich their leisure or civic
lives. (In a literal sense, occupations can be seen as any activities that occupy
people’s time and energy—or as roles that people occupy—regardless of
whether such activities or roles involve paid compensation.)
Super also emphasized the notion of role salience, which implies that
work, or any other life role, can vary in its centrality or importance for
any given individual and at different stages of life. This insight reminds us
that work is not the most valued role for everyone. (See Hartung, Chapter
4, for coverage of Super’s ideas regarding life-career development.) Such a
perspective is extremely liberating, allowing for a less work-centric view of
people’s lives, freeing career counselors to view their clients as whole people
with interests and commitments outside of work, and providing a valuable
link to the study of women’s career development (Richardson, 1993). Historically, men have often been socialized to focus primarily on their work
trajectories, giving less thought to other life domains, whereas women have
been more likely to view their work lives in the context of other central
life roles, such as romantic partner or parent. Life-career planning and
the allowance for differential role salience simultaneously challenges the
traditional, male career pattern as the way to deﬁne career development, normalizes alternative ways to pursue work, honors the feminist commitment
to equality, and offers the possibility of more ﬂexible choices for women and
men alike.

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

7

The What, When, Where, and How of Work
To this point, we have mainly focused on the why of work—the reasons why
people work—and how work relates to other life domains or roles. In so
doing, we have been discussing the general forces that impel, or motivate,
people to work. And we have so far sidestepped the crucial what, when,
where, and how questions: what speciﬁc form of work people either choose
or feel compelled to do, the how of choice making (the process through
which the individual and/or important others make work choices), the when
of work decisions (points at which key work choices are made), and the
where of work (the impact of the environment on choice and subsequent
work outcomes).
Much of this book is devoted to addressing these very questions. The
major theories of career development, contained in the ﬁrst section of
the book, all grapple with these questions to varying degrees. For example,
the theories of person–environment ﬁt (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2,
and Nauta, Chapter 3) tend to emphasize the what and where questions
(i.e., the content of work that people do and the role of the environment
in attracting them to or repelling them from certain forms of work). The
developmental theories (see Hartung, Chapter 4), meanwhile, highlight
the how and when questions (e.g., the ages or stages at which workrelated decisions are made and the processes by which these decisions are
aided or stiﬂed). The chapters in the second section of the book emphasize
key person and social factors (e.g., gender, social class) that often play
into work ‘‘choices’’ and affect how people lead their work lives. The
chapters in the third section focus on psychological and social attributes
that career counselors often assess when assisting people to select or adjust
to work. And the chapters in the ﬁnal section involve interventions that
extend theory and research to practice—the how of facilitating life-career
development.
Parenthetically, we placed the word choices in quotation marks in the last
paragraph to highlight the point that work decisions are not always—in fact,
are often not—a matter of purely free choice. Some people in certain cultural
and economic contexts may assert greater personal agency in selecting their
work than do others. In some contexts, ‘‘choice’’ is severely limited by ﬁnancial or other constraints. In other contexts, choices may be made primarily by
important others (e.g., family members). And in all cases, the environment
has something to say about what work people will be allowed to do and for
how long. Vroom (1964) observed that ‘‘people not only select occupations,
they are selected for occupations’’ (p. 56). Thus, employers, admissions
committees, and others serve as gatekeepers that help to determine initial
and continued access to particular work and educational paths.

8

Career Development and Counseling

WHAT IS A CAREER? WHAT IS CAREER DEVELOPMENT?
To this point, we have been using the term work as the most inclusive way
to refer to the subject matter at the center of this book. Work may also be
less laden with excess conceptual and cultural baggage than are other terms
used to describe the same essential area of human functioning. Some writers
have, in fact, suggested that the ﬁeld of vocational psychology be recast
as ‘‘work psychology’’ or the ‘‘psychology of working’’ (Blustein, 2006).
We appreciate this argument, but we also ﬁnd the older terms—vocational
psychology, career counseling, and so forth—still serviceable, if occasionally
problematic. We decided to retain ‘‘career development and counseling’’ in
the title of this book to maintain continuity with a large body of literature
that has accumulated on the study and promotion of work behavior. But it
is appropriate at this stage to deﬁne our terms more carefully.
Work, Job, Occupation, Vocation, Career—What’s the Difference?
Work refers to the domain of life in which people provide services or create
goods, typically (though not always) on a paid basis. It can also refer to
the speciﬁc activities that one performs for pay or on a volunteer basis (i.e.,
volunteer work). In most societies, work is associated with the period of life
after formal schooling (although some students engage in work as well as
academic roles) and before retirement, or disengagement from work. Job is a
speciﬁc work position held over a deﬁned period of time (e.g., being a quality
inspector at one factory for 10 years). Although job and career are sometimes
used synonymously in popular discourse, vocational psychologists often use
the term career to refer to a sequence or collection of jobs one has held over
the course of one’s work life. In this sense, people may hold different types
of jobs over the course of a single career. However, it is also common to use
career in a more limited sense to refer to one’s involvement in a particular job
family (e.g., engineering), which may include multiple jobs (e.g., being an
engineer at company A for 10 years and at company B for another 10 years).
It is in this sense that one can speak of a career change, a shift from one job
family to another (e.g., from engineer to teacher).
Other terms commonly used to refer to work behavior include occupation
and vocation. Both of these terms are often used interchangeably with career.
For example, many writers speak of occupational choice, vocational choice, or
career choice as meaning the same thing. But each of these terms, particularly
vocation and career, also come with some excess baggage, at least in the view
of some writers. Vocation is sometimes viewed as an antiquated term. It
originated from the Latin verb vocare, ‘‘to call,’’ and historically has been
used in some religious circles to refer to a divine calling to pursue a religious
path. Vocation was later used to refer to secular forms of work as well, and

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

9

leaders of the vocational guidance movement (e.g., Parsons, 1909) sought to
assist people in locating jobs that would best match their personal qualities
and be satisfying. In more recent times, the term vocation has been associated
with vocational/technical (as opposed to ‘‘academic track’’) education and
is sometimes used to refer to jobs that do not require higher education.
As a result, clients may sometimes be a bit confused about how someone
identiﬁed as a vocational counselor or psychologist can help them select or
adjust to a career path. Still, vocation has had staying power as a generic term.
Career may have a more contemporary feel than vocation and is more
commonly used in popular discourse. Potential clients may be more likely
to understand why they might see someone called a career counselor as
opposed to a vocational counselor, and many professionals in our ﬁeld
prefer to refer to themselves as career counselors or psychologists. However,
some writers ﬁnd the term career objectionable on political or socioeconomic
grounds and argue that it implies choice and privilege and that not everyone
who works has a subjective sense of career. According to this line of
reasoning, careers imply higher-status work. Thus, engineering is a career,
but housepainter is not because the former requires more education and tends
to command greater prestige and more favorable work conditions and pay.
Although we are sensitive to this argument, we are not sure that the term
career necessarily implies all these things (or that housepainters would agree
that they do not have careers). Moreover, it is hard to dismiss the term
without also dismissing the extensive literature with which it is associated.
In short, career is a compromise that most professionals in the ﬁeld have
been willing to make in the absence of an alternative term that meets with
universal acceptance. Yet it is well for readers to be aware of the controversy
that sometimes surrounds it.
What Is Career Choice and Development?
Career development can be seen as a process that encompasses much of the life
span—one that begins in childhood (and includes the formal and informal
experiences that give rise to talents, interests, values, and knowledge of
the world of work), continues into adulthood via the progression of one’s
career behavior (e.g., entry into and adjustment to work over time), and
culminates with the transition into, and adjustment to, retirement. It is a
concept designed to capture the dynamic, changing nature of career or work
behavior and is sometimes used as incorporating career choice and at other
times as distinct from it. Career choice may be seen as the process of selecting
and entering a particular career path, whereas career development refers
to one’s experience before, during, and (especially) after career choice. The
period before initial career choice may overlap with one’s educational life.

10

Career Development and Counseling

Some writers conceive of this period of academic or educational preparation
as a part of the larger career development process; others treat it as distinct from, but conceptually related to, career development. Of course, career
choice is not necessarily a static or one-time process. Many people revise their
career choices over time for various reasons (e.g., to pursue work that better ﬁts their interests and talents, to shift paths after involuntary job loss, or to
reenter the workforce after raising children). Career choice, in turn, often has
at least two phases: setting a choice goal and then taking steps to implement
this goal, for instance, through additional training or a job search process.
Career development is sometimes used synonymously with career advancement or management. We see these terms as somewhat distinctive, however.
Career advancement implies a linear process or one in which the individual progressively improves his or her career standing over time, as in the
metaphor of climbing a career ladder. Career management connotes a situation in which the individual is actively engaged in directing the course of
his or her own career development; that is, it implies a view of the person
as active agent, anticipating and adjusting to new opportunities and behaving proactively to cope with negative situations. Career development, by
contrast, connotes a continuous stream of career-relevant events that are not
necessarily linear or positive in impact and that may or may not be subject
to personal agency (e.g., being born into poverty, losing a job due to the
bankruptcy of one’s company). Although development ordinarily implies
forward movement, it also holds the potential for devolvement or regression
as well as progress.
Super, the dean of the developmental career theorists, described a number
of life stages through which careers were assumed to evolve (growth, exploration, establishment, maintenance, disengagement; see Hartung, Chapter 4),
and other developmental theorists also point to distinct stages or life periods
that are crucial to career choice and development (e.g., Gottfredson, 2005).
The current book is organized with three larger developmental periods in
mind, namely, the periods prior to work entry (e.g., see Turner & Lapan,
Chapter 19, and Whiston & James, Chapter 20), during work entry (e.g.,
Jome & Phillips, Chapter 21), and after work entry (e.g., Lent & Brown,
Chapter 22; Bobek, Hanson, & Robbins, Chapter 23), which may well involve
a recycling through periods of retraining/preparation and entry into new
career paths.
WHAT IS CAREER COUNSELING AND HOW IS IT DISTINCTIVE?
We use the term career counseling in this book, as will most of the chapter
authors, to refer to services offered to ameliorate or prevent problems with
work behavior, regardless of the prestige or level of education associated

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

11

with a given work option. In this section, we describe the purview of career
counseling, other services that may augment or overlap with it, and the
relation of career and personal counseling.
Formats and Foci of Career Counseling
Career counseling typically takes place between an individual client and
counselor, though many career counselors also employ group counseling
or workshops, particularly in educational settings in which a number of
clients are dealing with common developmental challenges (e.g., academic
or career-related choices). Career counseling can be directed at a fairly wide
range of client presenting problems, but these may largely be captured
within three larger categories:
Help in making and implementing career-related decisions. Helping clients make
career choices is probably the most popular image of career counseling. It
entails assisting clients in deciding among various career paths as well as
educational or training options (e.g., academic majors) that may have career
relevance. Some clients enter counseling needing assistance to identify viable
career options, with few if any ﬁrm ideas about which direction they might
like to pursue. In some cases, clients have prematurely eliminated options
that may, in fact, suit them well. Other clients enter with a dizzying array of
options in mind and hope for help in narrowing their list. Yet other clients
may have already made at least a preliminary decision about their educational or career direction and would like the counselor’s assistance either in
conﬁrming the wisdom of this choice or in putting their choice into action, for
example, by helping them locate and obtain employment in their chosen ﬁeld.
Whiston and James, Chapter 20, and Jome and Phillips, Chapter 21, focus,
respectively, on counseling for making and implementing career choices.
Although career choice counseling is often pursued by students anticipating the period of work entry, it is also often sought by adult workers wishing
to change directions (or sometimes forced to do so by circumstances) and
by persons planning to reenter the paid workforce after a period of primary
engagement in other life roles (e.g., parenting). For these reasons, it may
overlap with the career transition focus of career counseling, discussed later
in this section. In addition, counselors in school settings often focus on
orienting children and adolescents to the world of work, helping them gain
self-understanding, and aiding their academic performance. Such activities,
which are intended to prepare students to ultimately make and implement satisfying choices (Turner & Lapan, Chapter 19), may be part of the
developmental aims of vocational guidance and career education services.

12

Career Development and Counseling

Help in adjusting to work and managing one’s career. Another common focus
of career counseling involves work adjustment concerns, such as coping
with dissatisfaction with one’s job or difﬁculties with work socialization or
performance. These problems may be manifest at any point after work entry.
Sometimes they occur during the early period of transitioning from school to
work as people discover that their new job is not exactly what they expected
to ﬁnd or that they are having a difﬁcult time meeting the expectations of
their employer. At other times, work dissatisfaction or performance issues
may occur at later periods, for example, when people gradually come to feel
stiﬂed by a lack of variety or advancement opportunities or when a promotion
places them in a novel situation where their current skills are challenged
by new job requirements. Counseling to promote work satisfaction and
performance must contend with the many reasons an individual may be
unhappy at work as well as the many reasons supervisors or coworkers may
be unhappy with the individual (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22).
Help in negotiating career transitions and work–life balance. Some people seek
or are referred for career counseling speciﬁcally for help in making the
transition from school to work, from one form of work or career path to
another, or from work to retirement or other life roles. The issue of career
transitions is complex and multifaceted because such transitions may be
either voluntary (e.g., based on a desire to do something ‘‘more meaningful’’
or to engage in ‘‘career renewal’’) or involuntary (e.g., due to job layoff),
experienced as either developmentally on time and expected or unplanned
and premature, and be anticipated with great worry or, in other cases,
great excitement. Of course, whereas some clients may seek counseling
preemptively to improve their work lives before things go wrong, many
seek counseling with a sense of urgency or crisis after a negative life event
has occurred or seems imminent. Career transition issues are addressed by
Bobek and colleagues in Chapter 23.
Some clients also seek assistance in coping with the challenges of managing
multiple roles or maintaining work–life balance. Although their reasons for
counseling may not be stated exactly in those terms, these concerns may
be implicit in such presenting problems as stress at keeping up with work
responsibilities while caring for an ailing parent or dissatisfaction with one’s
relationship partner because he or she is perceived as not fulﬁlling a fair
share of child care or homemaking responsibilities. Some counselors may
view this class of presenting problems as not essentially a part of career
counseling and rather as being within the realm of relationship counseling
or even psychotherapy. We believe it clearly falls within the province of
career counseling, particularly if one takes a broadened view of career–life

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

13

counseling, seeing the work role as intersecting with other life roles (e.g.,
romantic partner, parent, family member). Several chapters in this book
include consideration of work–life balance issues (e.g., Heppner, Chapter 7;
Kenny & Medvide, Chapter 12; Lent & Brown, Chapter 22).
Our clustering of career presenting problems into three broad categories is,
admittedly, somewhat arbitrary. Some problems do not ﬁt neatly into only
one category. For example, as we noted, some clients anticipating a career
transition or dissatisﬁed with their current jobs may need to revisit career
choice issues to consider whether a career change may better ﬁt their current
interests or life circumstances. Still, it is helpful to think of career counseling
as encompassing multiple presenting issues that occur over the life span,
from the preentry period of education and work preparation through entry
into, adjustment to, and exit from the world of work. To be helpful to
clients, counselors must ordinarily arrive at a mutual agreement with them
on the goals and tasks of counseling. Taking a one-size-ﬁts-all approach—by
assuming, for example, that all career counseling involves career choice
issues—may severely limit the ways in which a counselor can be helpful to
his or her clients.
Career Counseling vis-à-vis Other Career Services
and Interventions
As Savickas (1994) has noted, career counseling is related to a variety of other
services intended to promote people’s career development, in particular,
guidance, advising, education, placement, coaching, and mentoring. The
ﬁrst three of these are mainly identiﬁed with educational settings; the
remaining three tend to be associated with work settings or with the transition
from education to work. Guidance refers to the career-orienting activities
typically provided by school counselors and teachers as they help students
to become aware of the work world, of the value of planning, and of
self-attributes that may relate to various career options. Career counseling
as a formal specialty grew partly out of this guidance function. In recent
years, computerized career guidance and information systems have been
developed to automate or aid the guidance function (see Gore, Leuwerke, &
Kelly, Chapter 18, this volume). Advising, typically associated with teachers
and professors, is usually limited to selection of coursework and fulﬁllment
of academic requirements but may involve less formal aspects, including
advice regarding career options.
Career education usually refers to formal school-based programs, often
at the middle and high school levels, aimed at introducing students to
the world of work, assessment of career-relevant personal attributes, and
exploration of career options that may ﬁt one’s personal attributes. It may

14

Career Development and Counseling

also include a work component (e.g., placement in a relevant part-time
job as a part of a school’s career academy). Career education may be seen
as an extension of the guidance function in that it is aimed at many of
the same career-orienting and planning objectives, though often in a more
structured and lengthier format. It differs from advising in that the focus is
on career exploration rather than simply provision of advice or instructions
on meeting academic requirements. A typical format for career education
involves coursework facilitated by school counselors or teachers. Career
planning courses are often offered at the college level as well to assist
students in making academic and career decisions.
Placement, as the term implies, is focused on ‘‘placing’’ students or workers
in particular jobs. It is concerned with helping people locate relevant job
openings, mount effective job searches, and present themselves effectively
to prospective employers (e.g., via resumes, job applications, and interview
preparation). (On the work organization side of things, human resources professionals are involved in recruitment, screening, and selection of prospective
employees.) Career counselors often provide services that overlap with those
of placement personnel because both may assist people in implementing their
career choices. Placement ofﬁces on college campuses are sometimes part of
a larger career services center that offers both career counseling and placement. The advantage of such an arrangement is that it provides students
with one-stop career assistance. In other cases, however, placement services
may be located in a unit separate from counseling services.
Finally, coaching and mentoring are increasingly popular career services.
Coaching has come to take on a number of different meanings in the career
world. Often it is focused on assisting workers, particularly managers
or executives, to improve their work performance or to promote their career
progress within a given work organization (e.g., prepare for a new role or
job). It may be practiced by service providers from a variety of professional
backgrounds (e.g., counselors, vocational psychologists, organizational psychologists) and overlap substantially with career counseling. Alternatively,
it may be offered by persons with relevant work content experience but no
formal counseling or psychological training. Mentoring typically refers to the
practice of pairing a newer worker with one or more experienced workers
for the purposes of helping the newcomer adjust to the work environment,
learn the ropes of his or her job, receive support and advice when work
problems surface, have a model for negotiating work–life balance, and generally facilitate his or her career progress. Mentors and mentees may come
together informally or be formally paired by the work organization.
It is apparent that career counseling can overlap with other career services.
It is, therefore, important for career counselors to be familiar with these
services so that they can facilitate clients’ use of them as needed, for example,

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

15

by making appropriate referrals to an academic advisor, a career class, or a
placement ofﬁce, or by helping clients identify mentors.
Career Counseling vis-à-vis Personal Counseling and Psychotherapy
There are differing views about how career counseling relates to personal
counseling and psychotherapy. Career counseling is clearly distinctive in
some respects. Its most obvious distinction is the focus on one or two life
domains, that is, preparation for work and functioning in work and school
contexts. Thus, it involves specialized training elements and courses of study,
for example, in career counseling and vocational psychology. However, the
prevailing view within the counseling professions appears to be that there
is often a false dichotomy between career and personal counseling (Hackett,
1993). This view is based on the observations that clients often present with
multiple concerns (e.g., depression and difﬁculty making a career choice),
that career issues are often intertwined with other life domains and roles
(e.g., the difﬁculty of a romantic couple in making dual career decisions),
that career problems can have emotional sides or consequences (e.g., stress,
dissatisfaction), and that counseling can frequently rotate back and forth
between career and other (e.g., personal, relational) life concerns.
Given the frequent overlap of career and personal counseling, it may
be argued that the ideal scenario is for counselors and psychologists to
be prepared, via training and experience, to deal with both career and
personal concerns. Training, for example, only in personal counseling and
psychotherapy can lead counselors and therapists to overlook or downplay
the importance of work-related issues or to feel incompetent at dealing
with them. It is, of course, imperative that one be able to recognize the
limits of one’s competence and, where those limits have been reached, to
make responsible referrals. However, there are also advantages to receiving
training of sufﬁcient breadth in counseling and therapy so that one is truly
competent to identify and deal with the more common career and personal
problems with which clients are likely to present.
It is probably most helpful to view the career versus personal counseling
controversy in terms of a continuum rather than a dichotomy, with more
purely career-type concerns (e.g., career choice) at one end and more purely
personal concerns (e.g., depression) at the other. In the middle of this continuum is where the two overlap or are interwoven (e.g., where choice is
made more difﬁcult by depression). A good example of how career issues
can be relatively distinct from and, at other times, overlap with personal
issues can be found within the types of clients who seek help with making career choices. Researchers have found that there are several types of
career indecision (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000) and that these can best be

16

Career Development and Counseling

approached with different counseling strategies. For instance, some clients
enter counseling with relatively focused, developmental problems in making a career decision. They do not generally experience decision-making
problems but are having trouble with this one area. Not surprisingly, perhaps, such clients often do well in just ﬁve or fewer counseling sessions that
are aimed exclusively at self-exploration, career information, and decisionmaking activities. Another type of career client enters counseling with a
characteristic tendency to experience negative affect and to be indecisive
in most life areas. To be maximally helpful, counseling with such clients
may well involve more extensive efforts to deal with both their career and
personal (e.g., cognitive and emotional) concerns.
SOME MYTHS AND REALITIES ABOUT CAREER COUNSELING
We have found that career counseling is viewed in stereotypic fashion by
some of our colleagues in the helping professions. Common stereotypes
include perceptions that career counseling is relatively simple, easy, formulaic, and brief; that it involves a ‘‘test ’em and tell ’em’’ approach in
which assessments are mechanically assigned and interpreted and clients
are quickly sent on their merry way; that computer programs can be used to
substitute for career counselors; and that the effects of career counseling are
not as impressive or meaningful as are those of personal counseling. In this
section, we brieﬂy address such perceptions and examine ways in which we
believe they can mistake or distort the reality of career counseling.
Career Counseling as Simple, Brief, and Highly Structured
Is it true that career counseling is simple, easy, formulaic, and brief? The
kernel of truth in this stereotype is that some clients do, indeed, proﬁt from
relatively brief, structured forms of career counseling. But it really depends
to a great extent on the nature of clients’ goals and presenting problems,
on other qualities they bring to counseling, and on the methods counselors
employ. As we noted before, research has found that many clients proﬁt
from ﬁve or fewer sessions of counseling aimed at career choice. Such rapid
gains are most likely to occur when (a) clients’ presenting problems are
limited to making a career-related decision, (b) clients do not exhibit high
levels of general indecisiveness or negative affect (i.e., global tendencies to
experience feelings like depression and anxiety), and (c) counseling includes
at least three of ﬁve critical ingredients (see Whiston & James, Chapter 20).
Many clients also proﬁt from receiving more than ﬁve sessions of career
counseling (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000). In such cases, it is likely that
their presenting issues extend beyond making a career decision (e.g., coping

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

17

with work dissatisfaction or stress), that they present with other issues that
affect their career development (e.g., chronic indecisiveness), or that their
career concerns are complexly intertwined with personal (e.g., emotional) or
relationship (e.g., work–family balance) issues. Such situations, which are
quite common, stimulate the creativity of career counselors and underscore
the need for them to be facile with both career and other forms of counseling.
For example, counseling for work dissatisfaction often draws on many of
the same strategies as would be employed with clients who seek help
because of dissatisfaction in other areas of their lives (Lent, 2004). Career
counseling need not be any less artful or spontaneous than other types of
counseling—and clients frequently present with problems that cannot be
neatly categorized as needing only one form of assistance.
The Role of Formal Testing
Is it true that career counseling is synonymous with testing? The kernel of
truth here is that career counselors often do employ formal assessments,
particularly with clients who seek assistance in making a career-related
decision. In fact, many clients have been told by advisors or others to go
see a career counselor to ‘‘take that test that will tell you what you should
do.’’ Of course, no test can read a client’s mind or future, much less make
a decision for her or him, and some clients are displeased, if not entirely
surprised, when they discover this reality. However, there are a number of
assessment devices that can provide very useful information about clients’
self-attributes (e.g., interests, values, abilities) in relation to educational and
career options they are considering or can help them expand or narrow their
range of options (see the chapters in the third section of this book). Although
not as dramatic, perhaps, as gazing into a crystal ball, it can be very helpful
to discover, for example, that one’s interests resemble those of people
who are satisﬁed working in health care settings. In fact, individualized
assessment is one of the components that accounts for the effectiveness of
career choice counseling (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000). Career counseling for
work adjustment and transition issues may also proﬁtably employ formal
assessment methods (Lent & Brown, Chapter 22; Bobek et al., Chapter 23).
Despite its documented utility, career counseling need not involve formal
psychometric measures exclusively or even at all. Many career counselors use less formal ways of gathering information about clients, often
in addition to psychometric measures, to aid the counseling process. For
example, depending on the presenting issue, some counselors use cardsorting activities, fantasy workday exercises, career genograms, role plays,
and a variety of other methods (Pope & Minor, 2000). Such options can stimulate their clients’ thinking about career issues and make the process of career

18

Career Development and Counseling

counseling more interactive, engaging, and creative—anything but the sterile, rigid, ‘‘test ’em and tell ’em’’ stereotype.
Counselors Versus Computers
Is it true that whatever career counselors have to offer could be done more
efﬁciently and just as effectively by a computer program? It is important to
acknowledge that most people do not seek the services of a career counselor.
Most make choices and solve other career-related problems on their own or
with the support and guidance of parents, teachers, friends, work colleagues,
or others. Computerized guidance and information systems and high-quality
Internet resources are useful tools for many persons who do not seek career
counseling and who have relatively uncomplicated, developmental needs.
Such options can aid people in gathering career-relevant information about
themselves and the world of work and, perhaps, in reconciling these two
sources of information (see Gore et al., Chapter 18). Computerized and
Internet-based options can also be useful adjuncts for people who do seek
career counseling. Research indicates, however, that for such persons, access
to computerized services alone, on average, yields less substantial effects
than when they also meet with a counselor (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000;
Whiston, Brecheisen, & Stephens, 2003). In essence, counselors can still do
things that computers do not, such as helping clients set and work toward
career goals, assisting them in processing complicated computer-generated
information, and aiding them in marshaling supports and overcoming
barriers to implementing their preferred choices (Brown et al., 2003).
The Effects of Career Counseling
Finally, how useful is career counseling compared to personal counseling
(i.e., where the two forms of intervention are treated as relatively distinct)?
Is it true that career counseling is somehow less impactful or meaningful?
For several reasons, we believe it would be a mistake to trivialize the importance of career counseling. First, one’s work can have a great impact on the
kind of life one leads, both hedonically (e.g., materially) and eudaimonically
(e.g., in terms of life meaning and purpose). As we noted earlier, work
plays a central role in many people’s lives. Its signiﬁcance often goes well
beyond the sheer amount of time and effort they put into their jobs or
the size of the paycheck they receive. For many, work (or its absence) can
have great psychological signiﬁcance, with the potential to spill over into
the nonwork parts of people’s lives. For example, work-related stresses or
conﬂicts can affect people’s sense of well-being when they are not at work.
Likewise, work colleagues become an important source of friendships and

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

19

general social support for many people. Although some compartmentalize their lives more than others, when people feel stiﬂed or unhappy in
their work lives, they are often likely to be unhappy with their lives as a
whole (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22). And this can have implications for
one’s friends and loved ones as well. Thus, it would be difﬁcult to overstate the value of counseling that can either prevent or remediate careerrelated problems.
Second, meta-analyses, which statistically combine the ﬁndings of many
studies together, have found that the effects of career choice counseling
actually rival and, in some cases, exceed the effects of personal counseling. For instance, the average person receiving career counseling tends to
show as much gain as the average person receiving psychotherapy, especially if career counseling involves at least three of ﬁve critical ingredients
(Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000; see Whiston & James, Chapter 20). We should
not press this comparison too far because the gains assessed in career counseling and psychotherapy outcome studies tend to involve different sorts
of outcomes (e.g., changes in career decidedness versus depression). However, career choice clients do show statistically and practically signiﬁcant
beneﬁts from counseling—beneﬁts that may well promote other aspects of
personal well-being.
WHO DOES CAREER COUNSELING AND STUDIES
WORK BEHAVIOR?
Career counselors and vocational psychologists are not alone in their interest in career development issues. There are many facets to work behavior,
and these are, accordingly, studied by a variety of professions. Thus, it
is useful to appreciate the larger lay of the land. Career counselors often
have master’s degrees in counseling, with a focus on career issues. They
may have studied in programs accredited by the Council for Accreditation
of Counseling and Related Educational Programs. Vocational psychologists
typically have doctoral degrees in counseling psychology. Their academic
programs may have been accredited by the American Psychological Association. Vocational psychology has, historically, been a central part of the
larger specialty of counseling psychology rather than an entirely separate
specialty area. Practicing vocational psychologists often consider themselves as career counselors, as well as more general therapists. Some
vocational psychologists prefer the title ‘‘career psychologist.’’ Some of the
key professional journals read by career counselors and vocational psychologists are the Journal of Vocational Behavior, Journal of Counseling Psychology,
Career Development Quarterly, Journal of Career Assessment, and Journal of
Career Development.

20

Career Development and Counseling

In addition to those trained speciﬁcally as career counselors and vocational psychologists, a variety of other master’s-level counselors, especially
school counselors, mental health counselors, and college counselors, may provide
career counseling or related career services. For example, school counselors
may lead comprehensive career guidance programs or teach career education classes, in addition to doing individual or group counseling aimed at
facilitating educational behavior or career planning. Some social workers also
focus on occupational issues, for example, as personnel in employee assistance programs. Historically, social work emphasized vocational services in
an effort to combat poverty, particularly in urban settings.
Within the realm of psychology, industrial/organizational (I/O) psychologists
also study and, in some cases, intervene in work-related issues. In some ways,
vocational and I/O psychologists are interested in opposite sides of the same
coin. They each focus on factors that promote effective work functioning,
but vocational psychologists are primarily concerned with person-focused
outcomes (e.g., how to facilitate an individual’s decisions), whereas I/O
psychologists mainly emphasize outcomes of concern to work organizations
(e.g., how to promote organizational productivity). Although they tend to
approach work behavior from these differing person versus organization
perspectives, their interests frequently overlap. For example, both specialties
are concerned with issues of work satisfaction, performance, stress, the
work–family interface, and workplace equity. The I/O psychologists are less
likely to receive training in career counseling but are somewhat more likely to
engage in organizational development and consulting activities. Occupational
health psychology, a relatively new specialty, is concerned with factors that
affect the psychological and physical health of workers (workplace safety,
psychological burnout). Various other psychological specialties, such as
educational psychology and developmental psychology, also study topics that
overlap with vocational psychology.
Finally, several ﬁelds outside of psychology and the helping professions
also share an interest in work behavior. In particular, occupational sociology
(also referred to as industrial sociology or the sociology of work) focuses on
work-related trends, such as technological change and employee–employer
relations, that affect workers and families at a large group or societal level.
Labor economics focuses on issues affecting employment levels, participation rates, income levels, and economic productivity (e.g., gross domestic
product). Like occupational sociologists, labor economists tend to examine
work-related outcomes and processes at a more collective level, rather than
at the level of individual workers or work organizations. These ﬁelds emphasize different aspects of work behavior than do counselors and psychologists,
but they share a concern with shaping public policies that promote the wellbeing of workers, though they may deﬁne well-being in social or economic,
rather than in psychological, terms.

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

21

CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND COUNSELING:
PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE
The ﬁeld of career development and the practice of career counseling have
evolved rapidly over the past century. However, an interest in work behavior
is hardly new. People no doubt began thinking about their work, what they
liked and disliked about it, how to do it better or with greater rewards, how
to handle conﬂicts with others at work, and so forth well before recorded
history. Zytowski (1972) discovered books about occupations dating back
to the late 1400s, and, of course, philosophers have long been preoccupied
with the role and meaning of work in people’s lives. A full-scale history
of career development and counseling is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Several writers have already traced the evolution of career development as
a formal discipline from its early roots in vocational guidance, circa 1850, up
through its current-day contributions and challenges. Some of these histories
focus primarily on vocational psychology (Crites, 1969; Savickas & Baker,
2005), and some on career counseling (Crites, 1981; Miller & McWhirter,
2006), though the two areas are greatly intertwined with one another. There
have also been intriguing histories of the pioneers of the vocational guidance
movement, which formed the foundation for present-day career counseling
and vocational psychology (Savickas, 2009).
One of the things that historians of career development agree upon is that
Frank Parsons (1909) deserves credit as one of the ﬁeld’s key early ﬁgures.
Parsons, a social reformer who was committed to raising the living standards
of the urban poor, ran an early vocational service in Boston. He developed a
deceptively simple three-step approach to vocational guidance that has been
widely incorporated into subsequent formal theories of career development
and counseling. In essence, he recommended that, in choosing a form of work,
people be encouraged to (1) achieve a ‘‘clear understanding’’ of their personal
attributes (e.g., interests, abilities) and (2) develop a knowledge of the
requirements and conditions of different occupations and then (3) use ‘‘true
reasoning’’ to consider how to reconcile these two sources of information.
Modern-day career counselors may identify with a variety of theoretical
positions and employ somewhat different terms and methods, but Parsons’s
simple formula still serves as a fundamental blueprint for the practice of
career choice counseling,
Historians of the ﬁeld also tend to agree that the two world wars of the 20th
century—and the Great Depression in between them—were major inﬂuences
on the ﬁeld’s evolution within the United States. In particular, the military
needed assistance in assigning its recruits to different jobs in both wars,
and the Veterans Administration was concerned with assisting returning
veterans to adjust personally, educationally, and vocationally to civilian life
after World War II. The Great Depression created an unparalleled challenge

22

Career Development and Counseling

of returning people to work in some organized way. In addition, increasing
industrialization and associated changes in the economy (e.g., shifts from
agriculture to manufacturing) in many countries during the 20th century also
created a need for proven methods of matching people with work options,
attending to their productivity, and nurturing their satisfaction and loyalty.
These challenges were a huge boon both to the development of psychological
instruments that could systematically assess self and occupational attributes
and to the creation of guidance and counseling methods. Assessment devices,
like the present-day Strong Interest Inventory and the General Aptitude Test
Battery, emerged from this early cauldron of activity. So did the development of career counseling methods based on directive and, eventually,
person-centered approaches.
Once veterans returned from the world wars and the economy recovered
from the Great Depression, there was a continuing need for career counseling
and placement personnel. Subsequent societal and economic changes in the
latter half of the 20th century (e.g., the increasing popularity of higher
education, shifts in employment demand from manufacturing to service
sectors) formed the historical context for the further evolution of the career
development ﬁeld. In more recent decades, there have been considerable
changes in technology (e.g., the introduction of personal computers and the
Internet), in the nature of work (e.g., increasing need for knowledge workers),
in global economic competition, and in the structure of work organizations.
Observing such changes, many career writers have concluded that a
new era in career development has dawned (e.g., Hesketh, 2000). The old
psychological contract between worker and employer has been cast aside.
Where many could once expect to work for a single employer for many years
and feel conﬁdent that their loyalty and productivity would be rewarded
appropriately, the new contract promises far less security and stability.
Terms like boundaryless careers, protean careers, and Me Incorporated abound
in the recent career literature, particularly among I/O psychology writers.
These terms are based on the assumption that employers will continue to
be motivated, for reasons of global economic competition, to retain smaller
permanent workforces. They will, instead, draw on temporary, part-time,
or contract workers to a much greater degree to create a ﬂexible, just-intime workforce that requires neither beneﬁts nor long-term commitments—a
cadre of workers who can complete particular projects and then move on.
The implication is that current workers, and especially those in the future,
will need to be increasingly adaptable and resilient in their approach to work.
The ‘‘Me Incorporated’’ notion refers to the need to treat oneself essentially
as a private vendor who is responsible for ﬁnding new work, investing in
one’s own career development, developing new interests, and updating
one’s skills to remain employable under uncertain and constantly changing

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

23

conditions. Some believe that the new contract will render obsolete current
theories of career development and current approaches to career counseling.
Although the context of work may be changing, we are convinced that
current career theories still have relevance. People may have less stability in
terms of where and when they work, but they still proﬁt from identifying
and accessing work options that are compatible with their work personalities
(e.g., interests, talents, personal and cultural values) and in which they can
perform successfully. We think this is a point that career futurists sometimes
miss. If a career is based on the assumption that one will work for a particular
employer over one’s entire work life, then that restrictive notion of career
may be dead (and was never truly viable for many workers). However, if
career is deﬁned, consistent with Super, as the sequence or collection of jobs
held over one’s work life, then the concept of career remains as alive as ever,
but it is a concept owned by the worker rather than by the employer and
requires no assumptions about the long-term stability of a particular job.
We are not sure that career choice and development theories really need
to predict the exact job that a single individual will enter and stay in
for life. What such theories have always done best is to help people to
identify and adjust to an array of compatible work options. Beyond these
traditional contributions, however, we do see a need for new theories
and preventive-developmental interventions to help people negotiate a
changing macroenvironment. Although the range of jobs people perform
is still generally captured well within existing occupational classiﬁcation
schemes (see Gore et al., Chapter 18), how and where many jobs are
performed (e.g., using computers, at home) is changing—and so is the
need to prepare for periods of work instability and change. The time-tested
Parsonian formula, though still viable, needs to be supplemented with new
methods aimed at assisting students and workers in anticipating and coping
with periods of ﬂux and transition (Lent, in press). We are not sure it is a
reasonable goal to transform all workers into entrepreneurial chameleons.
Not everyone has entrepreneurial interests or talents, and poets do not easily
turn themselves into engineers just to ﬁnd the next job. But it may make
sense to approach adaptability, resilience, and planning as qualities that,
potentially, can be learned or strengthened through counseling and other
forms of career intervention (e.g., career courses, workshops).
A FINAL WORD: CAREER DEVELOPMENT AS PRACTICE,
SCHOLARSHIP, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE FORUM
We believe this is an exciting time to enter the ﬁeld of career development. In fact, there have probably been few more momentous times in
the ﬁeld’s history. In addition to meeting the external challenges of a

24

Career Development and Counseling

changing work world, the ﬁeld seems poised to transform itself from within.
In particular, career counselors and vocational psychologists are, increasingly, meeting and working together with their counterparts across cultural
and national boundaries as the larger profession—like the work domain that
serves as their common focus—becomes more and more internationalized.
The U.S.-based professional associations, like the National Career Development Association and the Society of Vocational Psychology, are not alone.
International associations, like the International Association for Educational
and Vocational Guidance and the International Association of Applied Psychology, are prospering. The ﬁeld has clearly been infused with a great deal
of vitality and energy, as career counselors and vocational psychologists
around the world ﬁnd new ways to study and promote career behavior.
It is important to emphasize that career development and counseling is
both a scholarly and a practice ﬁeld. That is, it is devoted to understanding
work behavior and to applying this understanding to practices that directly
enrich clients’ lives. Although the ideal for many years in psychology
has been to develop scientist-practitioners—that is, persons who attend to
both of these spheres—the reality is that many professionals are drawn to
one of them more than to the other. Indeed, this very awareness is a reﬂection
of what has been learned about career behavior, for instance, that interests
tend to favor choice of some work activities over others. Thus, those with
primarily social interests may gravitate toward the counseling role, and
those with stronger science interests may favor the research and scholarship
roles. The ﬁeld needs talented people to perform both roles, and it needs
them to communicate well with one another so that scholarship remains
responsive to practice and that practice is based on science as well as art.
More and more, the ﬁeld is also becoming aware of the need to invest a
greater portion of its collective energy in advocacy and public policy efforts,
including involvement with decision makers and leaders who formulate
wide-ranging education and work policies. Such upstream advocacy may aid
people’s career opportunities and functioning at a systemic level, regardless
of whether they ever seek formal career services.
As part of its science, practice, and advocacy missions, the career development ﬁeld is also marked by a commitment to social justice and multiculturalism and to serving the needs of an increasingly diverse society and
world. Indeed, concerns about social justice pervade the history of the career
development ﬁeld. They were prominent in the earliest days of the ﬁeld,
as social reformers sought to improve the lives of recent immigrants and
others lacking economic privilege (Parsons, 1909), and they were a primary
stimulus for the ﬁeld’s efforts during the middle and latter parts of the
20th century to better meet the needs of women, persons with disabilities,
veterans, work-bound students, and other traditionally underserved clients

Understanding and Facilitating Career Development in the 21st Century

25

from diverse social and economic backgrounds. Social justice remains a
hallmark of the ﬁeld, as evidenced by a continuing sensitivity to the ways
in which diversity shapes people’s career experiences (e.g., see the chapters
in the second section of this book). In short, assisting people to obtain and
succeed at work has long been seen as an essential way to improve the
human condition and to promote equity.
CONCLUSION
We covered a fair bit of ground in this chapter. In particular, we noted a variety of roles that work may play in people’s lives, from meeting basic survival
needs through helping them to address meaning-of-life questions. We also
deﬁned several key terms, such as career and career development; identiﬁed the
counseling and psychological professionals who are speciﬁcally trained to
provide career counseling and related services; and noted a variety of other
professions that share an interest in career development or work behavior.
We considered some common myths and stereotypes surrounding career
counseling, pointing out ways in which they may sometimes be accurate but
more often are not. Finally, we described the ﬁeld’s historical context and
some of its contemporary challenges and argued that a concern with social
justice and a respect for human diversity have been key forces directing the
ﬁeld’s evolution from its inception up through its present state. We welcome
you to the ﬁeld of career development and counseling and hope you will
ﬁnd it a great place to develop your own career.
REFERENCES
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bordin, E. S. (1994). Intrinsic motivation and the active self: Convergence from a
psychodynamic perspective. In M. L. Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence
in career development theories: Implications for science and practice (pp. 53–61). Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or ﬁve) sessions and a cloud of
dust: Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D.
Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Brown, S. D., Ryan Krane, N. E., Brecheisen, J., Castelino, P., Budisin, I., Miller, M., &
Edens, L. (2003). Critical ingredients of career choice interventions: More analyses
and new hypotheses. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 411–428.
Crites, J. O. (1969). Vocational psychology: The study of vocational behavior and development. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Crites, J. O. (1981). Career counseling: Models, methods, and materials. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.

26

Career Development and Counseling

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York,
NY: Harper & Row.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hackett, G. (1993). Career counseling and psychotherapy: False dichotomies and
recommended remedies. Journal of Career Assessment, 1, 105–117.
Hesketh, B. (2000). Prevention and development in the workplace. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 471–498). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Lent, R. W. (2004). Toward a unifying theoretical and practical perspective on
well-being and psychosocial adjustment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51,
482–509.
Lent, R. W. (in press). Career-life preparedness: Revisiting career planning and
adjustment in the new workplace. Career Development Quarterly.
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50,
370–396.
Miller, D. S., & McWhirter, E. H. (2006). The history of career counseling: From
Frank Parsons to twenty-ﬁrst-century challenges. In D. C. Capuzzi & M. D. Stauffer (Eds.), Career counseling: Foundations, perspectives, and applications (pp. 3–39).
Boston, MA: Pearson.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing a vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Pope, M., & Minor, C. W. (Eds.). (2000). Experiential activities for teaching career
counseling classes and for facilitating career groups. Columbus, OH: National Career
Development Association.
Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives: A location for counseling psychologists. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 425–433.
Savickas, M. L. (1994). Convergence prompts theory renovation, research uniﬁcation,
and practice coherence. In M. L Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in career
development theories: Implications for science and practice (pp. 235–257). Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Savickas, M. L. (Ed.). (2009). The 100th anniversary of vocational guidance [Special
section]. Career Development Quarterly, 57, 3.
Savickas, M. L., & Baker, D. B. (2005). The history of vocational psychology:
Antecedents, origin, and early development. In W. B. Walsh & M. L. Savickas
(Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (3rd ed., pp. 15–50). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates. Career choice and development:
Applying contemporary theories to practice (3rd ed., pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York, NY: Wiley.
Whiston, S. C., Brecheisen, B. K., & Stephens, J. (2003). Does treatment modality
affect career counseling effectiveness. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 390–410.
Zytowski, D. G. (1972). Four hundred years before Parsons. Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 50, 443–450.

SECTION ONE

MAJOR THEORIES OF
CAREER DEVELOPMENT,
CHOICE, AND ADJUSTMENT

CHAPTER 2

Minnesota Theory of Work
Adjustment
JANE L. SWANSON AND MADALYN SCHNEIDER

T

HE MINNESOTA THEORY of Work Adjustment (TWA) is considered a model

of person–environment vocational ﬁt, as is Holland’s vocationalpersonality typology (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume). Both
theories evolved from earlier trait-and-factor counseling (Chartrand, 1991;
Rounds & Tracey, 1990), which, in turn, was based on Parsons’s (1909/1989)
social reform efforts at the turn of the 20th century. Further, both TWA
and Holland’s theory (as based on Parsons) may be described as ‘‘matching
models’’ (Betz, 2008), in which vocational choice is maximized by specifying
important characteristics of the individual and the environment and then
attempting to ﬁnd the best match or ﬁt between individual and environment.
The characteristics of individuals and environments that are considered to
be important vary by theory. An additional component of matching models is that the degree of ﬁt is quantiﬁed in some manner, and ﬁt may
then be used to predict central outcomes, such as the person’s satisfaction
or tenure.
Both TWA and Holland’s model evolved within the discipline of vocational psychology yet share a conceptual foundation with the broader
study of person–environment psychology (Dawis, 2000). This perspective is
built on the assumption that there is a reciprocal relationship between
people and their environments: People inﬂuence their environments, and
environments inﬂuence the people in them (Walsh, Price, & Craik, 1992).
Work is but one of many environments in which people interact—others
include school, family, intimate relationships, living environments—all of
which inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by the individuals in them. Vocational psychology—its science and its practice—has embraced the tenets
29

30

Career Development and Counseling

of person–environment psychology (Swanson & Chu, 2000), as evidenced
by the TWA and Holland models of person–environment ﬁt. In addition
to being a model of person–environment ﬁt, TWA may be considered a
model of person–environment interaction (Dawis, 2005): The concept of ﬁt
describes the degree of similarity between a person and an environment,
whereas the concept of interaction reﬂects the reciprocal inﬂuence between a
person and an environment.
CORE CONCEPTS OF THE THEORY OF WORK ADJUSTMENT
The theory of work adjustment, as reﬂected in its name, has as its primary
focus the process of adjustment to work environments, but it also can
be used to help people make vocational choices (to be discussed in a
later section of this chapter). In the original presentation of the theory
and throughout its continued development, TWA has been characterized
by careful attention to the structural characteristics of theory building.
For example, Dawis and Lofquist (1984) presented 17 formal propositions
and associated corollaries, which have guided subsequent work related to
the theory. These propositions are presented in slightly paraphrased form
in Table 2.1.
As a theory of person–environment ﬁt, TWA focuses on the process of
persons’ adjustment to their work environments, including the characteristics
of persons that predict their satisfaction with the work environment, as well
as their level of satisfactoriness within the work environment. TWA actually
consists of two models: a predictive model and a process model (Dawis,
2005). The predictive model focuses on the variables that explain whether
individuals are satisﬁed with their work environments and whether they are
satisfactory to their work environments, which in turn predicts individuals’
tenure in their work environments. The process model focuses on how the ﬁt
between individuals and their environments is attained and maintained.
Predictive Model: Predicting W HETHER Work Adjustment Occurs
The predictive model comprises the core of TWA and is reﬂected in
Propositions I through IX in Table 2.1. TWA proposes two sets of parallel characteristics. First, an individual has a set of needs and values that
may (or may not) be met by rewards available in the work environment.
Second, the work environment has a set of job requirements that may (or
may not) be met by the skills and abilities that the individual possesses.
Each of these intersections of an individual and his or her environment is
described by the term correspondence or its lack, discorrespondence. If a person’s needs are met by his or her work environment, then the person and

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

31

Table 2.1
Summary of Formal Propositions of the Theory of Work Adjustment
Proposition I: Work adjustment at any time is indicated by the concurrent levels of the
person’s satisfaction and satisfactoriness.
Proposition II: A person’s satisfaction is predicted from the correspondence between his
or her values and the environment’s reinforcers, provided that there is also correspondence
between the person’s abilities and the environment’s ability requirements.
Corollary IIA: A person’s values may be inferred from knowledge of his or her
satisfaction and the environment’s reinforcers.
Corollary IIB: An environment’s reinforcers may be inferred from knowledge of a
person’s values and his or her satisfaction.
Proposition III. A person’s satisfactoriness is predicted from the correspondence between
his or her abilities and the environment’s ability requirements, provided that there is also
correspondence between the person’s values and the environment’s reinforcers.
Corollary IIIA: An environment’s ability requirements may be inferred from knowledge of
a person’s abilities and his or her satisfactoriness.
Corollary IIIB: A person’s abilities may be inferred from knowledge of an environment’s
ability requirements and the person’s satisfactoriness.
Proposition IV: Prediction of a person’s satisfaction is moderated by his or her
satisfactoriness.
Proposition V: Prediction of a person’s satisfactoriness is moderated by his or her
satisfaction.
Proposition VI: The probability that a person will leave an environment is inversely related
to his or her satisfaction.
Proposition VII: The probability that an environment will ﬁre a person is inversely related to
his or her satisfactoriness.
Proposition VIII: A person’s tenure is predicted from his or satisfaction and
satisfactoriness.
Given Propositions II, III, and VIII:
Corollary VIIIA: A person’s tenure is predicted from the correspondence between his or
her values and the environment’s reinforcers, and the correspondence between his or
her abilities and the environment’s ability requirements.
Corollary VIIIB: A person’s tenure is predicted from the correspondence between
person and environment.
Proposition IX: Person-environment correspondence increases as a function of a person’s
tenure.
Proposition X: The correspondence between a person’s style and the environment’s style
moderates the prediction of the person’s satisfaction from the correspondence between
his or her values and the environment’s reinforcers, and the prediction of the person’s
satisfactoriness from the correspondence between his or her abilities and the
environment’s ability requirements.
Proposition XI: A person’s ﬂexibility moderates the prediction of his or her satisfaction
from the correspondence between his or her values and the environment’s reinforcers.
(Continued)

32

Career Development and Counseling

Table 2.1 (Continued)
Proposition XII: An environment’s ﬂexibility moderates the prediction of a person’s
satisfactoriness from the correspondence between his or her abilities and the
environment’s ability requirements.
Proposition XIII: The probability that a person will engage in adjustment behavior is
inversely related to his or her satisfaction.
Corollary XIIIA: A person’s ﬂexibility threshold may be determined from knowledge of
this probability associated with his or her satisfaction.
Proposition XIV: The probability that an environment will engage in adjustment behavior is
inversely related to the person’s satisfactoriness.
Corollary XIVA: An environment’s ﬂexibility threshold may be determined from
knowledge of this probability associated with the person’s satisfactoriness.
Proposition XV: The probability that a person will quit an environment is inversely related
to his or her perseverance.
Corollary XVA: A person’s perseverance threshold may be determined from knowledge
of this probability associated with his or her quitting the environment.
Proposition XVI: The probability that an environment will terminate (ﬁre) an individual is
inversely related to its perseverance.
Corollary XIVA: An environment’s perseverance threshold may be determined from
knowledge of this probability associated with the environment’s terminating a person.
Given Propositions VIII, XV, and XVI:
Proposition XVII: A person’s tenure is predicted jointly with his or her satisfaction,
satisfactoriness, and perseverance, and the environment’s perseverance.
Source: The propositions are adapted from Dawis (2005) with slight alterations in wording; the original
numbering is preserved.

environment are in correspondence; if not, then they are in discorrespondence. Likewise, if the work environment’s requirements are met by the
person, then the person and environment are in correspondence; if not, then
they are in discorrespondence. The former situation determines the individual’s level of satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) with the work environment; the
latter refers to the individual’s level of satisfactoriness (or unsatisfactoriness)
to the work environment. Said another way, an individual has needs, and
the work environment has rewards; if needs and rewards (or reinforcer patterns) correspond, then the individual is satisﬁed. Likewise, an individual
has abilities, and the work environment has ability requirements; if abilities and ability requirements correspond, then the individual is considered
satisfactory. These relationships are illustrated in the left side of Figure 2.1.
TWA emphasizes the measurement of abilities and values to facilitate
the match of individuals’ characteristics with the characteristics of the work
environment (the assessment of these concepts is discussed is a later section).
In the parlance of TWA, abilities are ‘‘reference dimensions of skills’’ (Dawis,

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

Correspondence

Satisfactoriness

Promote
Transfer

Abilities

Ability
Requirements

33

Ability
Requirements

Fire
Retain

Individual

Job

Tenure

Values

Reinforcer
Pattern

Remain

Correspondence

New Job

Reinforcer
Pattern

Satisfaction

Quit

Figure 2.1 Prediction of Work Adjustment
(‘‘Prediction of Work Adjustment’’) in A Psychological Theory of Work Adjustment, by R. V. Dawis and
L. H. Lofquist (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984) p. 62. Reprinted with permission.

2005); that is, abilities are the more general dimensions underlying speciﬁc
skills. For example, verbal ability is the general dimension underlying
demonstrated reading comprehension and vocabulary. In a similar fashion,
values are the general dimensions underlying speciﬁc needs. TWA includes
six core values: achievement (using one’s abilities and having a feeling of
accomplishment), comfort (feeling comfortable and not feeling stressed),
status (achieving recognition and being in a dominant position), altruism
(being of service to others and being in harmony with others), safety (having
a stable, ordered, and predictable work environment), and autonomy (being
independent and having a sense of control) (Dawis, 2002).
If an individual is both satisﬁed and satisfactory, then the individual
and his or her environment are in a state of harmonious equilibrium,
and work adjustment has been achieved. If, however, the individual is
dissatisﬁed, unsatisfactory, or both, then a state of disequilibrium exists.
This disequilibrium serves as a motivational force, propelling some type
of change to occur. The speciﬁc type of change depends on a number of
other factors, to be discussed later. Thus, dissatisfaction serves a central
motivational role in TWA. Dissatisfaction of either party—the person or
the environment—represents a disequilibrium in the person–environment
system and serves as the impetus for some kind of adjustment to occur.

34

Career Development and Counseling

Disequilibrium is an uncomfortable state that motivates actions that
lead to reestablishment of equilibrium. As Dawis (1996) noted, ‘‘Satisfaction motivates ‘maintenance’ behavior; dissatisfaction motivates adjustment
behavior’’ (p. 87). Adjustment behavior may take one (or more) of four
avenues (Dawis, 2002): Two of the options are present when individuals are dissatisﬁed with their environments, and two of the options are
present when individuals are unsatisfactory (and therefore the environment
is dissatisﬁed with them). The ideal state is when a person is satisﬁed and
satisfactory, leading to maintenance behavior. However, a person could be
satisﬁed yet unsatisfactory, dissatisﬁed yet satisfactory, or both dissatisﬁed
and unsatisfactory. These latter three states lead to adjustment behavior.
If people are dissatisﬁed, they have two possible choices: attempting
to change the environment or change themselves. They may be able to
inﬂuence the environment to change the number or kinds of reinforcers
that it provides, for example, by requesting a salary increase or a change
in work tasks. Alternatively (or in conjunction with environmental change),
workers could change the number or kind of needs that they require, such
as changing their expectations about salary or rethinking how they interact
with a difﬁcult coworker. Ultimately, individuals must decide whether to
stay in the current work environment or leave for another environment.
If individuals are unsatisfactory, they have two possible choices: increasing
their level of skill or expanding their skill repertoire to meet the requirements
of the environment or attempting to change the environment’s expectations.
Moreover, the environment has several possible actions, with the ultimate
outcomes of retaining or terminating the individual.
Although TWA focuses on both the individual and the environment, the
theory clearly emphasizes what the person experiences: The term satisfaction
refers to an individual’s satisfaction with his or her job, whereas the term
satisfactoriness refers to an individual with whom the work environment is
satisﬁed. Tenure occurs when an individual is both satisﬁed and satisfactory
(Dawis, 2005) (see the center portion of Figure 2.1).
In addition to these basic predictions, TWA proposes a number of moderating relationships and variables. As depicted by the dotted X in the center
of Figure 2.1, the processes of correspondence, satisfaction, and satisfactoriness inﬂuence one another. That is, workers’ levels of satisfaction with their
work environment is predicted to inﬂuence their level of satisfactoriness to
the work environment; if workers are satisﬁed, then they are more likely
to perform at a satisfactory level, whereas if they are not satisﬁed (i.e., if
their needs are not being met), then they are less likely to perform at a
satisfactory level. Conversely, if individuals are performing at a level that
the environment judges to be satisfactory, then they are more likely to be
satisﬁed than if they are performing at an unsatisfactory level.

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

35

Another type of moderator variable included in TWA is personality style,
which describes how individuals characteristically interact with their environments. TWA proposes four styles: celerity, pace, rhythm, and endurance.
Celerity describes how quickly one responds or the speed with which an
individual initiates interaction with the environment. A person with high
celerity responds quickly to the environment, perhaps even impulsively,
whereas a person with low celerity moves slowly in interacting with the
environment. Pace refers to how intensely one responds to the environment.
Once an individual chooses to act on the environment, then pace describes
the rate of interaction, such as high or low energy. Rhythm is the pattern of
the pace of one’s response, such as steady, cyclical, or erratic patterns, and
endurance refers to sustaining the pattern of response to the environment,
namely, how persistently one responds. These four personality style variables help explain why individuals with similar values and abilities exhibit
different behaviors within the same work environment (Swanson & Fouad,
2010). These style variables also can be used to describe the environment,
thus leading to a description of the correspondence between an individual
and his or her environment. For example, an individual with a high degree
of celerity would be in greater correspondence with an environment that
requires a similar level of celerity than an environment with low celerity.
Although the four style variables are not included in the model in Figure 2.1,
these variables and the level of person–environment correspondence they
produce are important to consider.
Process Model: Predicting HOW Work Adjustment Occurs
The process model adds to TWA’s ability to predict work adjustment
by focusing on how adjustment occurs and how it is maintained. Recall
that discorrespondence between people and their environments serves to
motivate behavior; the process portion of TWA deﬁnes the parameters and
outcomes of that motivational force. Recall, too, that discorrespondence
refers to either the individual being dissatisﬁed with the work environment,
the individual being unsatisfactory to the work environment, or both. TWA
proposes that individuals’ adjustment styles characterize how they react to
the occurrence of discorrespondence, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Adjustment style consists of four variables: ﬂexibility, active adjustment, reactive adjustment, and perseverance. Flexibility refers to how much
discorrespondence people will tolerate before they reach a threshold of
dissatisfaction that leads to some type of adjustment behavior. Individuals
vary in the amount of ﬂexibility that they will exhibit before their mismatch
with the environment becomes too great, but eventually discorrespondence
may exceed their tolerance and individuals move into an adjustment mode.

Unacceptable

Range of
unmangebale
discorrespondence

Discorrespondence

Career Development and Counseling

Requires
change to
another
environment

Point at which

Acceptable

Range of tolerable
discorrespondence

ne
ve
cti
Re
a

s
es

en
tiv
Ac

Act
on
environment

ss

Range of adjustment
Dimension of

36

Act
on
self

flexibility level exceeded

Range of flexibility
requires little
or no action

Point of discorrespondence

Figure 2.2 Relationships Between Adjustment-Style Dimensions
(”Relationship Among Adjustment-Style Dimensions”) in Essentials of Person Environment Correspondence Counseling, by L. H. Lofquist and R. V. Dawis (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1991)
p. 19. Reprinted with permission.

Once an individual’s ﬂexibility level has been exceeded, adjustment behavior
can be characterized as either active or reactive.
In active adjustment, the individual acts on the environment in an effort
to decrease discorrespondence (such as by trying to change the available
rewards and/or trying to change what the environment requires). In reactive
adjustment, the individual acts on himself or herself to reduce the amount
of discorrespondence (such as by changing his or her own needs and/or
skills). Activeness and reactiveness are not mutually exclusive; rather, an
individual might use both modes of adjustment. Finally, perseverance refers to
the length of time that an individual is willing to persist in a discorrespondent
environment after engaging in adjustment behavior. An individual who quits
the job after a brief attempt at change is characterized as low in perseverance,
whereas an individual who persists despite repeated or lengthy attempts at
change is considered high in perseverance.
Adjustment styles are relevant to the environment, too. Environments
differ in how much discorrespondence they will tolerate between an

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

37

individual’s abilities and the environment’s ability requirements before
judging the person as unsatisfactory (ﬂexibility). When an environment’s
ﬂexibility threshold is exceeded, it engages in either active (e.g., provide additional training to improve the person’s abilities) or reactive (e.g., move the
person into a more ability-correspondent position). Some environments may
ﬁre a discorrespondent employee more quickly than others (perseverance).
All four of these adjustment style variables are hypothesized to vary among
individuals and work environments and are important factors in predicting
adjustment behavior. The concepts of active and reactive adjustment modes
and of ﬂexibility and perseverance are thus useful in predicting what an
individual is likely to do when he or she is dissatisﬁed with a job. The active
and reactive adjustment modes can also provide options for counselors and
clients to consider to improve clients’ levels of work satisfaction. Flexibility
and perseverance are viewed as ﬂuctuating characteristics: An individual
may be ﬂexible and able to tolerate discorrespondence on one day but
then be unable to tolerate it the next, thus entering into adjustment mode.
Despite ﬂuctuations, an individual is likely to develop a characteristic
adjustment style over time, which may be evident in multiple arenas of his
or her life.
The illustration of adjustment behavior in Figure 2.2 demonstrates the
inﬂuence of the four adjustment style variables. The vertical line in the center
of the ﬁgure represents the range of discorrespondence that an individual
(or an environment) might experience, with zero discorrespondence at the
bottom of the line and extreme discorrespondence at the top of the line.
Moving up the center line represents an increase in discorrespondence, as
that amount begins at an acceptable or tolerable level. As the increase in
discorrespondence exceeds an individual’s level of ﬂexibility—or becomes
intolerable or unacceptable—then he or she embarks on adjustment behavior,
either active or reactive. The individual continues with adjustment attempts
until he or she has reached the limit of his or her perseverance, at which
point the amount of discorrespondence has become unmanageable, and he
or she will leave the environment.
For example, a woman who has a strong desire for autonomy is dissatisﬁed
by the level of close monitoring provided by the supervisor in her new job,
yet she is ﬂexible in tolerating this discorrespondence because she believes
her supervisor will reduce monitoring after a training period. However, her
supervisor continues close monitoring even when she has demonstrated her
skill, and the employee experiences dissatisfaction. When the employee’s
dissatisfaction reaches an intolerable level, she will then attempt to make an
adjustment. She may choose to talk with her supervisor about her frustration
(active adjustment) and/or decrease her feelings of dissatisfaction by changing how she interprets her supervisor’s behavior (reactive adjustment). If she

38

Career Development and Counseling

is successful, then she will feel satisﬁed (achieve correspondence and restore
equilibrium). If, however, her supervisor continues to closely monitor her
work, and she continues to feel dissatisﬁed, she will need to decide whether
to persevere in her job or leave for another position (either in the same
organization or at a different organization).
The concepts found in the predictive model interact with those in the
process model. According to TWA, people’s levels of satisfaction mostly
depend on how their values correspond to the reinforcers provided by the
environment. However, workers’ levels of satisfaction also depend on their
satisfactoriness as well as on their ﬂexibility. In other words, if a person
is unsatisfactory (the environment is dissatisﬁed with the individual), the
individual’s satisfaction can no longer be predicted as well by the correspondence between his or her values and the environment’s reinforcers. Further,
the greater an individual’s ﬂexibility, the easier it is for the environment
to satisfy the individual (Dawis, 2002). In a similar fashion, an individual’s
satisfactoriness depends mostly on how his or her abilities correspond to the
requirements of the environment. However, an individual’s satisfactoriness
also depends on his or her level of satisfaction, as well as the ﬂexibility of the
environment. In other words, if a person is dissatisﬁed, then the individual’s
satisfactoriness can no longer be predicted as well by the correspondence
between his or her abilities and the environment’s requirements. Further,
the greater the environment’s ﬂexibility, the more tolerant it will be with
a lower level of correspondence between an individual’s abilities and the
environment’s requirements.
Assessment of TWA Constructs
A strength of the theory of work adjustment is the amount of attention that
its authors have devoted to developing psychometrically sound measures of
its central constructs. Unfortunately, however, many of these measures are
not widely available and so have not been adopted by career practitioners.
However, as Dawis (2005) noted, the theory is not wedded to use of these
speciﬁc measures, and, in fact, using measures developed outside of a theoretical framework may provide more robust evidence on the theory’s validity
and practical utility. Indeed, because TWA focuses on the correspondence
between person variables and environmental variables, any measures that
provide a way to quantify that correspondence may be used within the
context of TWA constructs. In this section, we brieﬂy discuss the measures
developed by Dawis and his colleagues, as well as other measures.
The role of vocational interests in TWA is less direct than in other theories
of vocational choice. Dawis (1996) described interests as ‘‘more complex
variables that are functions of the simpler TWA variables’’ (p. 92) of abilities

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

39

and values. Speciﬁcally, if interests are deﬁned as liking or disliking different
activities (Hansen, 2005; Chapter 14, this volume), then abilities inﬂuence
what activities an individual chooses to try and/or continue to pursue,
and values inﬂuence an individual’s liking or disliking. Assessment of an
individual’s interests is a common component of career counseling and may
be used as a mechanism for discussing a client’s abilities and values.
Needs and values. Assessing work-related needs and values is frequently
an important part of career counseling (see Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15,
this volume). Within the context of TWA, the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire (MIQ; Rounds, Henley, Dawis, Lofquist, & Weiss, 1981) was
developed to measure an individual’s needs and values. The MIQ measures
20 work-related needs and produces in scores on six values: (1) Achievement,
consisting of Ability Utilization and Achievement; (2) Altruism, consisting
of Co-workers, Social Service, and Moral Values; (3) Autonomy, consisting of Creativity and Responsibility; (4) Comfort, consisting of Activity,
Independence, Variety, Compensation, Security, and Working Conditions;
(5) Safety, consisting of Company Policies, Supervision–Human Relations,
and Supervision-Technical; and (6) Status, consisting of Advancement,
Recognition, Authority, and Social Status.
The MIQ proﬁle provides two different types of information. First, intraindividual (ipsative) scores on the 20 needs and six values are plotted relative
to one another. Second, comparisons are made between an individual’s
values proﬁle and patterns of reinforcers empirically derived for a variety
of occupations. The latter yields a list of occupations in which a person is
likely to be satisﬁed. The MIQ materials and scoring are available through
the Vocational Psychology Research website at the University of Minnesota
(http://www.psych.umn.edu/psylabs/vpr/default.htm).
Another option for assessing an individual’s needs and values is the
Work Importance Proﬁler (WIP), available via O*NET, the online occupational information database of approximately 1,000 occupations developed
by the U.S. Department of Labor (http://www.onetonline.org). The WIP
is based on a ranked version of the MIQ and produces scores on six
values—Achievement, Independence, Recognition, Relationships, Support,
and Working Conditions—that correspond to the six MIQ values, as well as
scores on 21 needs (the 20 MIQ needs plus Autonomy). The O*NET provides
links to its database of occupations on the basis of the six values; for example,
one can browse occupations that match a speciﬁed set of work values, such
as Achievement and Independence, or search for a speciﬁc occupation and
then determine the characteristic needs and values of individuals in that
occupation (see also Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15, this volume).

40

Career Development and Counseling

Measures of work-related values other than the MIQ and the O*NET’s WIP
include Super’s Work Values Inventory (Nevill & Super, 1986; Zytowski,
2006). Another method of addressing work-related values within career
counseling is a values card sort. A card sort consists of a set of cards, each
imprinted with a work-related value, which clients place into categories
according to their importance. Because a card sort is completed during a
career counseling session, it provides a mechanism for in-session discussion
of the client’s important values, the origin of these values, and how values
are related to other career-related information such as interests and skills.
Work satisfaction. In TWA, ‘‘satisfaction’’ is conceptualized as the correspondence between an individual’s values/needs and the reinforcers offered by
the environment. In some ways, satisfaction in TWA is a derived variable
that can be inferred from the match between an individual’s values and
an environment’s reinforcers. For instance, good correspondence between
values and reinforcers implies satisfaction. However, satisfaction can also
be measured directly by asking individuals about the degree to which
they like their work environments, either overall or speciﬁc aspects (see
Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this volume). Early in the evolution of TWA,
the researchers developed a measure of work satisfaction, the Minnesota
Satisfaction Questionnaire (MSQ; Weiss, Dawis, England, & Lofquist, 1967).
The MSQ provides scores on 20 facets of job satisfaction, as well as three
summary scores (Intrinsic, Extrinsic, and General Satisfaction). The 20 facets
parallel the scales on the MIQ (with the exception of the MIQ Autonomy
scale). This measure has been used primarily in research and is not generally used in practice settings. It, too, is available through the Vocational
Psychology Research website (http://www.psych.umn.edu/psylabs/vpr
/default.htm).
More generally, the study of job satisfaction has received substantial attention within the domain of industrial/organizational psychology (Fritzsche &
Parrish, 2005; Swanson, 2012; Zedeck, 2010), where a main focus is the
organizational antecedents and consequences of job satisfaction (Landy &
Conte, 2010). In contrast, there is a relative lack of attention to job satisfaction
within vocational psychology. Lent (2008) examined job satisfaction from the
perspective of vocational psychology. He noted that job satisfaction ‘‘may
be viewed as an integral part of work adjustment and overall mental health’’
(p. 462). Lent deﬁned job satisfaction as ‘‘people’s cognitive constructions
of their work enjoyment’’ (p. 463), highlighting the cognitive and affective components that constitute satisfaction. Lent and Brown (Chapter 22,
this volume) also describe how organizational psychology research on job
satisfaction can be used to inform career counseling practice.

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

41

Many measures of job satisfaction have been developed for use in a variety
of settings, focusing on both global (overall feelings about a job) and facet
(speciﬁc aspects of a job) satisfaction (Fritzsche & Parrish, 2005). For example,
the Job Descriptive Index (JDI; Smith, Kendall, & Hulin, 1985) consists of
72 items that measure satisfaction with ﬁve aspects of a job (work, pay,
promotions, supervision, and coworkers). Lent and Brown (Chapter 22, this
volume) describe this and other measures of job satisfaction more fully.
Satisfactoriness. Another measure developed as part of TWA, the Minnesota
Satisfactoriness Scales (MSS; Gibson, Weiss, Dawis, & Lofquist, 1970) was
designed to measure 28 variables of job satisfactoriness and is completed
by an individual’s work supervisor. The MSS yields scores on ﬁve scales:
Performance, Conformance, Dependability, Personal Adjustment, and General Satisfactoriness. The MSS is available from the Vocational Psychology
Research website (http://www.psych.umn.edu/psylabs/vpr/default.htm).
Although the MSS as originally designed would not often be used as part
of a career intervention, it or another measure of job performance could be
used as a self-assessment tool. For example, clients and counselors could
use the MSS in session to assess how clients perceive their performance on
these ﬁve dimensions of satisfactoriness and to facilitate discussion of the
accuracy of clients’ perceptions.
RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR THE THEORY OF WORK ADJUSTMENT
Dawis (1996) and Dawis and Lofquist (1984) provide thorough overviews
of the early research support for TWA. Their reviews will be brieﬂy visited
here, followed by a review of more recent research on TWA constructs and
propositions, as well as areas in which further research support is warranted.
General Support for TWA Predictions
General research on person–environment ﬁt has served as a foundation for
the study of work adjustment. In TWA speciﬁcally, the primary concepts
include those deﬁned earlier: person–environment correspondence, satisfaction, satisfactoriness, and tenure. Some of the variables receiving research
attention include work personality variables (e.g., abilities, values, personality style), work environment variables (e.g., reinforcer systems, ability
requirements, environment style), indicators of work adjustment (e.g., satisfaction and satisfactoriness), and correspondence between personality and
environment. Although there have been instruments constructed speciﬁcally
for use with this theory, such as the Minnesota Satisfactoriness Scales, other

42

Career Development and Counseling

instruments have also been used to support the theory and its applicability
to real people and places of employment (Dawis & Lofquist, 1984).
Much TWA research, using both TWA-speciﬁc measures and other more
general measures of person–environment ﬁt constructs, has focused on
the prediction of satisfaction, satisfactoriness, work adjustment, and tenure.
Results have indicated strong support for the interactions between these
constructs, which maps well onto the ﬁrst eight formal propositions of
TWA (Dawis, 1996; see Table 2.1). For example, Dawis (1996) described the
studies supporting the hypotheses that satisfaction and satisfactoriness are
predicted by person–environment correspondence (Propositions II and III).
Although this ﬁrst set of TWA propositions has received empirical support,
the second set (Propositions X through XVII), geared toward the roles of
personality style, adjustment style, and ﬂexibility of both the individual and
the environment, remains in need of research attention (Dawis, 1996).
Research Pertaining to Diverse Populations
In addition to personality styles and ﬂexibility, research on the use of TWA
with diverse populations remains another area in which expansion is needed.
Swanson (1996) emphasized the importance of demonstrating the ability of
person–environment ﬁt theories, such as TWA, to explain and predict work
satisfaction, satisfactoriness, and tenure across diverse groups (e.g., gender,
race, ethnicity, and culture). Following this recommendation, a few studies
have shown support for the use of TWA with culturally stigmatized groups,
such as lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) populations (Lyons, Brenner, &
Fassinger, 2005); African American employees (Lyons & O’Brien, 2006), and
individuals with mental retardation (Chiocchio & Frigon, 2006). Using a
measure of perceived person–job and person–organization ﬁt developed by
Saks and Ashforth (1997), Lyons and colleagues (2005) found that perceived
correspondence predicted satisfaction and the probability of remaining in
the current work environment for lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals.
This support held true even in the presence of informal heterosexism in
the workplace, which is an example of a unique barrier that stigmatized
populations experience in workplaces. Results of the study indicated that
the persons’ perception of correspondence between their values and the
work environment reinforcers mediated the relationship between workplace
heterosexism and job satisfaction (Lyons et al., 2005). That is, the experience
of heterosexism resulted in lower levels of satisfaction because it tended to
reduce employees’ sense of ﬁt with the work environment.
In a similar study with African American employees, Lyons and O’Brien
(2006) reported that perceived person–environment ﬁt explained 43% of the
variance in job satisfaction and 17% of the variance in intentions to quit.

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

43

Perceived racial climate, however, did not moderate or mediate the relationship between ﬁt and satisfaction or turnover intentions, supporting the
primacy of perceived person–environment correspondence. Further, qualitative analyses coded for TWA values and racial climate indicated the TWA
value of comfort was cited most often as contributing to job satisfaction,
whereas racial climate was cited least often. Chiocchio and Frigon (2006)
also demonstrated support for the use of TWA in a sample of adults with
mental retardation, for whom both satisfactoriness and satisfaction together
predicted tenure 16 weeks after starting a job. These studies suggest the
usefulness of TWA in explaining the work experiences of different groups
of people.
Research on the process model (e.g., on the roles of personality styles,
adjustment styles, ﬂexibility, and perseverance) has been much more limited
than research on the predictive model. Several writers have suggested that
attention to personality factors might enhance TWA by providing a more
holistic picture of what the individual brings to the interaction between
the person and environment. Hesketh and Grifﬁn (2005), for example, suggested that such factors as mental health, general well-being, knowledge
as well as skills, abilities, and higher-order needs or values need to be
considered to more fully understand the adjustment strategies that people employ and various options to enhance career success across diverse
populations (Renfro-Michel, Burlew, & Robert, 2009). Although additional
research is needed (especially on the process model and the validity of
TWA in culturally diverse populations), TWA’s theoretical concepts offer
potential beneﬁt for practitioners. In the next section, we discuss some of the
applications of TWA.
APPLICATIONS OF TWA
The theory of work adjustment can be applied to better understand current
work trends, stages of career development, and career adaptability for
culturally diverse populations. As Grifﬁn and Hesketh (2005) discuss, it is
common, or even expected, that contemporary organizations will experience
environmental change. These changes will have an effect on everyone
involved in the workplace. Environmental change may lead to organizational
expansion, reduction, or shifts in power or resources. These changes are
likely to alter the reinforcements and requirements that characterize the
environment. Therefore, the environment may no longer correspond with
what the individual employee originally brought to the interaction. On
the other side of the coin, shifts occurring for the individual (e.g., life
changes such as a medical diagnosis, having a child, or a variety of other
events or shifts in values or priorities) may render reinforcers that were

44

Career Development and Counseling

previously valued by an individual much less reinforcing. When such
discorrespondence occurs, the workplace or the individual will be required
to adjust to restore satisfaction and satisfactoriness. Adjustment may consist
of active, reactive, or tolerant behavior by either the organization or the
individual (Grifﬁn & Hesketh, 2005). TWA may be a useful framework
within the current career climate to enhance understanding of the continuous
change process and how it impacts individuals, the environment, and the
interaction between the two.
TWA also intersects with the positive psychology movement, which has
natural connections to the broader ﬁeld of vocational psychology. This
movement includes a greater focus on mental health, well-being, and life
satisfaction. It is widely recognized that job satisfaction is closely interconnected with overall life satisfaction (Lent, 2008; Lent & Brown, Chapter 22,
this volume; Swanson, 2012). With satisfaction as one of TWA’s key components, there is an inherent connection between TWA and positive psychology
(e.g., Eggerth, 2008). TWA depicts how environmental reinforcers, satisfactoriness, and other factors feed into a person’s job satisfaction, which in
turn may have an impact on individuals’ overall levels of life satisfaction
and mental health. Thus, the application of TWA for persons experiencing
dissatisfaction at work may at the same time alleviate psychological distress
and promote greater life satisfaction and well-being, one of the goals of the
positive psychology movement.
Career Issues Throughout the Life Span
As one of the primary theories of person–environment ﬁt, TWA can be
useful in the early stages of career exploration and development to help
individuals identify an array of occupational possibilities in which they
may achieve satisfaction and success in the future. According to TWA,
an effective strategy with adolescents and young adults is to identify their
major work-related needs, values, skills, and abilities, as well as occupational
possibilities that correspond with their values and abilities (Dawis, 2005),
which should promote more satisfying and satisfactory choices. Attention to
person–environment ﬁt during initial entry into a career ﬁeld may also lead
to higher-quality employment experiences (Saks & Ashforth, 2002).
By focusing on work adjustment, TWA can also be useful in counseling
persons who are currently dissatisﬁed with their work environments or
who are judged as unsatisfactory in their current jobs. TWA provides some
clear hypotheses about sources of dissatisfaction and unsatisfactoriness that
can provide directions for counseling. For example, a practitioner familiar
with TWA would explore with dissatisﬁed clients their major work-related
values and how well these are being met in their work environments.

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

45

Should need–reinforcer discorrespondence be identiﬁed, the client could
then explore and implement different active and reactive strategies to achieve
greater correspondence. Should these strategies fail, then the counselor might
work with the client to identify more value-correspondent jobs or occupations. Additionally, clients’ levels of ﬂexibility would also be considered.
Clients who are characteristically inﬂexible are likely to report dissatisfaction with seemingly minor levels of discorrespondence and may require
close attention to value–reinforcer correspondence in exploring future job
or occupational possibilities.
Similarly, in working with clients who are judged to be performing poorly
at work (unsatisfactory workers), TWA would suggest an exploration of the
clients’ abilities and the degree to which these abilities match the ability
requirements of their current jobs. And again, should discorrespondence
be evident, counselors would explore with clients different active and reactive strategies that may be employed to achieve greater satisfactoriness.
Counselors would also help clients explore and identify alternative jobs or
occupations in which the client is more likely to achieve satisfactory performance. Lent and Brown (Chapter 22, this volume) provide some additional
suggestions about how TWA and other theories can be applied in working
with clients experiencing problems of job satisfaction and satisfactoriness.
Recent work has explored the applicability of TWA to promoting adjustment to retirement (Harper & Shoffner, 2004). For individuals reaching
the age of retirement, adjustment is not only probable but also probably
unavoidable. No matter what life after retirement will look like, there are
likely to be differences from the world of work that the individual currently
experiences. The ultimate goal for most individuals is to achieve satisfaction
in their postretirement lives. Thus, TWA could be used in working with
individuals who are planning for retirement or experiencing difﬁculties in
adjusting to retirement by exploring how their major needs and values are
being satisﬁed in their postretirement lives and how they might implement
their abilities in this new developmental stage.
Using TWA With Diverse Clients
As mentioned in the previous section regarding research support for TWA,
there remain limited empirical data on the application of TWA to many
speciﬁc populations. However, this does not necessarily mean that TWA
lacks beneﬁt for working with a diverse clientele. There are several examples
of applying TWA concepts with speciﬁc populations, drawing on authors’
experiences as career practitioners. TWA has been used to conceptualize career issues for people who have HIV/AIDS (Dahlbeck & Lease,
2010), symptoms of anorexia nervosa (Withrow & Shoffner, 2006), and the

46

Career Development and Counseling

speciﬁc challenges experienced by lesbian women (Degges-White & Shoffner,
2002). Each of these authors discussed the dynamic nature of the person and
the environment, as well as their interaction. For example, chronic health
status issues for persons living with AIDS/HIV may affect previous levels of abilities and skills and lead to a reevaluation of needs and values;
TWA would be useful in framing related work adjustment issues. Withrow
and Shoffner (2006) described the personality and behavioral characteristics of women with disordered eating symptoms as leading to ‘‘precarious
person–environment correspondence’’ (p. 366), in which the achievement of
job satisfaction and satisfactoriness exacerbates eating disorders. In applying
TWA to lesbians, Degges-White and Shoffner (2002) described the relationship between being ‘‘out’’ in the workplace and four critical aspects of TWA:
job satisfaction, person–environment correspondence, the importance of
workplace reinforcers, and abilities. These unique challenges may also be
apparent for gay, bisexual, and transgendered workers. Research discussed
earlier (Lyons et al., 2005) suggested that the experience of heterosexism in
the work environment might have a signiﬁcant impact on LGB workers’
perceptions of ﬁt and, therefore, their satisfaction with their jobs.
Analysis of the challenges to successful career choice and adjustment of
unique groups of individuals such as those just discussed highlights the
usefulness of TWA tenets. The central concepts of TWA—that person–
environment correspondence leads to favorable outcomes and that discorrespondence leads to adjustment behavior—provide a core framework that
can be used to understand and work with diverse clients encountering
difﬁculties with work adjustment.
Career counseling from the TWA perspective addresses the two aspects of
correspondence: the client’s satisfaction with his or her job or occupation and
the client’s satisfactoriness within his or her work environment. Counselors
using TWA as a theoretical framework would begin by identifying the needs
and abilities of the client. These characteristic needs and abilities are unique
starting points, and so counselors would explore the speciﬁc nature of
the client’s abilities and needs, as well as the degree of satisfaction and
satisfactoriness resulting from the degree of ﬁt between a client and his or her
environment. Counseling from the perspective of TWA is primarily focused
on discorrespondence and the resolution of clients’ discorrespondence with
their environments through career choice and adjustment.
Lofquist and Dawis (1991) suggested several questions to guide a counselor’s work with clients from the framework of TWA. First, what is the
match between clients’ abilities and the ability requirements of their jobs?
Clients’ abilities may be too high or too low for the position. Second, what
are clients’ subjective evaluations of their abilities and the discorrespondence
they are experiencing with requirements of the work environment? Is there

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

47

a discrepancy between self-estimated and actual abilities or between the
perceived and actual environmental requirements? Third, what is the match
between clients’ needs and the rewards offered by the environment? Fourth,
are clients actually both satisﬁed with and satisfactory in their work environments but experiencing difﬁculties in nonwork domains? These questions
translate TWA tenets into testable hypotheses to pursue in career counseling
(Swanson & Fouad, 2010).
A unique aspect of TWA is that counselors may focus on characteristics
of work (and nonwork) environments to a greater degree than in other
theories (Juntunen & Even, 2012). Such a focus allows counselors and
clients to determine the degree of correspondence between environmental
requirements and rewards and an individual’s abilities and needs.
Interventions in Organizational Settings
TWA also has potential applications for work organizations. For example,
personnel assessment may be a primary area in which TWA could be
used. TWA has had a history of application within personnel assessment
and evaluation of job performance. Much job performance evaluation has
focused solely on measures of individuals’ capabilities (see Lent and Brown,
Chapter 22, this volume). TWA, however, depicts job performance as a
measure of the interaction between a person’s ability and the demands or
requirements of the workplace (Dawis, 1980). Therefore, ﬁnding ways to
assess job performance within the actual environment, rather than solely
the person’s capability to perform job like tasks, would be an incorporation
of TWA into performance evaluation. TWA could also be used in other
interventions, such as organizational leadership and management aimed
at creating a positive work climate and promoting workplace support
(Grifﬁn & Hesketh, 2005). The creation and employment of organizationallevel interventions is equally important as interventions aimed at individuals
because TWA emphasizes the needs and requirements of each within the
adjustment process.
Case Example
To further examine how TWA may be used in working with clients, we
discuss the case of Jasmine. Jasmine is a 19-year-old single, heterosexual
Latina. She is an only child and has a close, supportive relationship with
her mother, a social worker, who lives three hours away. Jasmine is a
sophomore in college, currently majoring in interior design. She sought
career counseling because she recently began to question her choice of
major but is unsure of other majors or careers she might like to pursue.

48

Career Development and Counseling

Interior design has been her dream career since the age of 10, and Jasmine
never considered alternative career paths. She reports ﬁnding enjoyment in
organizing and decorating rooms and in seeing others’ happiness as a result
of her creativity.
Jasmine has always been a good student, earning As and Bs throughout
high school, as well as in her ﬁrst semester of college. However, during the
past two semesters, she has begun earning Cs, which Jasmine attributes to
the types of courses she has been taking for her major. These courses consist
of architecturally based classes requiring knowledge of ‘‘angles and math’’
that she is ‘‘not able to understand,’’ despite the hours she reports spending
on assignments and projects. She has begun feeling unexcited about her
work and misses the experience of being artistically creative with colors,
themes, and objects within a room. She has begun to perceive designing the
structure of a room as overly restrictive. Jasmine wishes to receive help in
deciding whether to continue with her interior design major.
TWA can aid in the understanding of Jasmine’s current experiences of
discorrespondence with her major through exploring both her satisfaction
and satisfactoriness as contributing forces. In terms of satisfaction, Jasmine
reported that she enjoyed interior design based on the process of organizing
rooms, creating color schemes and themes, and seeing others’ enjoyment. In
terms of TWA values, these reﬂect independence and achievement, including
ability utilization (making use of her artistic abilities), achievement (being
able to see what she has accomplished), creativity (being able to try her own
ideas), and social service (doing things for others).
Her creativity needs of artistic expression are currently not being met in
the courses she is taking, causing her to have low levels of satisfaction. In
terms of satisfactoriness, the interior design major requires an architecturally
based skill set that does not match Jasmine’s repertoire of abilities, resulting
in low satisfactoriness.
Goals of career counseling with Jasmine may be (a) clarifying her needs in
a work environment, (b) increasing understanding of her abilities and how
they relate to interior design or other academic majors, and (c) ultimately
making a decision regarding whether to remain in her current major or
change to a different major. These goals work together within the TWA
framework to ﬁrst understand what factors are important for Jasmine to
experience correspondence with an academic major or career and then aid
in identifying what Jasmine can do to obtain satisfaction and tenure in a
given environment. These goals can be obtained through exploration of both
the self and the environment. For example, exploring past experiences and
environments in which Jasmine has felt her needs were met, as well as
those in which she felt her needs were not sufﬁciently met, may provide
important information regarding the ﬂexibility and variation of Jasmine’s

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

49

needs. Such an exploration may provide greater insight into which needs
are necessary for Jasmine to experience satisfaction within an environment.
Jasmine could also take the O*NET Work Importance Proﬁler (WIP) to
help in the identiﬁcation of her major work-related values (see Rounds & Jin,
Chapter 15, this volume). One advantage of the formal value assessments
that can be obtained by the MIQ or WIP is that they provide a rank-ordering
of values that may aid individuals who have a hard time discriminating
among important values and needs. For example, Jasmine may feel that
relationships with coworkers and using her creative abilities are equally
important to her, whereas the WIP might suggest that achievement is
more important to her than relationships with coworkers. Using assessment
tools such as the MIQ or WIP also may bring needs and values to the
forefront of discussion with Jasmine, such as having high scores on working
conditions that lead her to consider the importance of needs such as pay and
job security.
Exploring and identifying Jasmine’s abilities and the skill requirements of
the occupation of interior design, as well as other potential options, can also
be used to predict the occupational areas in which Jasmine is likely to be
most satisfactory. Finally, identifying ways in which Jasmine may change
her current environment (e.g., adding art classes to her course load to meet
her need for artistic expression) may also be a beneﬁcial intervention in
ﬁnding ways to increase satisfaction and correspondence without changing
to a completely new major and career path.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
As evidenced throughout this chapter, TWA has great potential for understanding the experiences of clients presenting with career choice issues
and for assisting clients (whether individuals or organizations) in increasing work adjustment. In this section, we offer take-home tips for career
professionals in using TWA.
1. TWA is a well-constructed theory with possible applications across the
career life cycle. It can be used to help people (a) forecast the types
of occupations in which they may achieve satisfaction and satisfactoriness, (b) select among different occupational possibilities, (c) achieve
(or reachieve) satisfaction and satisfactoriness in the current work environment and identify work environments that might be associated with
greater satisfaction and satisfactoriness, and (d) aid in the retirement
adjustment process.
2. In all cases, TWA suggests that clients be helped to identify their
major work-related (or retirement-related) needs, values, and abilities.

50

Career Development and Counseling

Theories vary in the concepts they deem most important; values and
abilities constitute the primary focus of TWA.
3. TWA is a person–environment ﬁt theory. Thus, it is also important to
help clients identify work environments that appear to be correspondent with their major work-related needs, values, and abilities. There
are a variety of occupational information systems that can be employed
for this purpose, including the Minnesota Occupational Classiﬁcation
System and the O*NET data bases (see Gore, Leuwerke, & Kelly,
Chapter 18, this volume).
4. Discorrespondence may occur for either the person or the environment.
Clients may enter career counseling expressing dissatisfaction with
their jobs or career choices, but counselors are advised to remember
that individuals also may be unsatisfactory; that is, the environment
may be dissatisﬁed with the person. The concepts of TWA provide a
ready framework for attending to both aspects of dissatisfaction.
5. Some research suggests that the theory has cross-cultural validity,
especially in the predictions of satisfaction among LGB individuals and
African Americans. Thus, value-reinforcer correspondence seems an
important target for counseling LGB and African American clients who
are looking for satisfying career options or experiencing dissatisfaction
in the workplace. TWA seems also relevant to other groups as well, but
research is limited.
6. Finally, fully informed and comprehensive career counseling will
incorporate other empirically supported theories and research along
with TWA in helping people make satisfying and satisfactory career
choices and achieve workplace and retirement adjustment. For
example, Rounds (1990) found that value-reinforcer correspondence
(from TWA) and RIASEC congruence (from Holland’s theory) did a
better job of predicting work satisfaction than did either correspondence or congruence alone. We also identiﬁed some ways in which
concepts drawn from other theoretical approaches (such as positive
psychology) and attention to contextual factors may help develop
more complex approaches to understanding and assisting clients.
REFERENCES
Betz, N. E. (2008). Advances in vocational theories. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 357–374). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Chartrand, J. M. (1991). The evolution of trait-and-factor career counseling: A person
X environment ﬁt approach. Journal of Counseling and Development, 69, 518–524.
Chiocchio, F., & Frigon, J. Y. (2006). Tenure, satisfaction, and work environment
ﬂexibility of people with mental retardation. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68,
175–187. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.11.004

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

51

Dahlbeck, D. T., & Lease, S. H. (2010). Career issues and concerns for persons living
with HIV/AIDS. Career Development Quarterly, 58, 359–368.
Dawis, R. V. (1980). Personnel assessment from the perspective of the theory of work
adjustment. Public Personnel Management, 9, 268–273.
Dawis, R. V. (1996). The theory of work adjustment and person–environmentcorrespondence counseling. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career
choice and development (3rd ed., pp. 75–120). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dawis, R. V. (2000). The person–environment tradition in counseling psychology.
In M. E. Martin Jr., & J. L. Swartz-Kulstad (Eds.), Person–environment psychology and mental health: Assessment and intervention (pp. 91–111). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Dawis, R. V. (2002). Person–environment correspondence theory. In D. Brown &
Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development (4th ed., pp. 427–464). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dawis, R. V. (2005). The Minnesota theory of work adjustment. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 3–23). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Degges-White, S., & Shoffner, M. F. (2002). Career counseling with lesbian clients:
Using the Theory of Work Adjustment as a framework. Career Development
Quarterly, 51, 87–96.
Eggerth, D. E. (2008). From theory of work adjustment to person–environment
correspondence counseling: Vocational psychology as positive psychology. Journal
of Career Assessment, 16, 60–74. doi:10.1177/1069072707305771
Fritzsche, B. A., & Parrish, T. J. (2005). Theories and research on job satisfaction. In
S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory
and research to work (pp. 180–202). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gibson, D. L., Weiss, D. J., Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1970). Manual for
the Minnesota Satisfactoriness Scales. Minnesota studies in vocational rehabilitation,
XXVII. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.
Grifﬁn, B., & Hesketh, B. (2005). Counseling for work adjustment. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 483–505). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hansen, J. C. (2005). Assessment of interests. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 281–304).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Harper, M. C., & Shoffner, M. F. (2004). Counseling for continued career development after retirement: An application of the theory of work adjustment. Career
Development Quarterly, 52, 272–284.
Hesketh, B., & Grifﬁn, B. (2005). Work adjustment. In W. B. Walsh & M. Savickas
(Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology: Theory, research, and practice (3rd ed.,
pp. 245–266). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Juntunen, C. L., & Even, C. E. (2012). Theories of vocational psychology. In N. A.
Fouad, J. A. Carter, & L. M. Subich (Eds.), APA handbook of counseling psychology.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

52

Career Development and Counseling

Landy, F. J., & Conte, J. M. (2010). Work in the 21st century: An introduction to industrial
and organizational psychology (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.
Lent, R. W. (2008). Understanding and promoting work satisfaction: An integrative
view. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed.,
pp. 462–482). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1991). Essentials of person–environment-correspondence
counseling. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lyons, H. Z., Brenner, B. R., & Fassinger, R. E. (2005). A multicultural test of
the theory of work adjustment: Investigating the role of heterosexism and ﬁt
perceptions in the job satisfaction of lesbian, gay, and bisexual employees. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 52, 537–548. doi:10.1037/0022–0167.52.4.537
Lyons, H. Z., & O’Brien, K. M. (2006). The role of person–environment ﬁt in the
job satisfaction and tenure intentions of African American employees. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 53, 387–396.
Nevill, D. D., & Super, D. E. (1986). The Values Scale: Theory, application, and research.
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Parsons, F. (1989). Choosing a vocation. Garrett Park, MD: Garrett Park Press. (Original
work published 1909)
Renfro-Michel, E. L., Burlew, L. D., & Robert, T. (2009). The interaction of work
adjustment and attachment theory: Employment counseling implications. Journal
of Employment Counseling, 46, 18–26.
Rounds, J. B. (1990). The comparative and combined utility of work value and
interest data in career counseling with adults. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37,
32–45. doi:10.1016/0001–8791(90)90005-M
Rounds, J. B., Henley, G. A., Dawis, R. V., Lofquist, L. H., & Weiss, D. J. (1981). Manual
for the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Rounds, J. B., & Tracey, T. J. (1990). From trait-and-factor to person–environment
ﬁt counseling: Theory and process. In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Career
counseling: Contemporary topics in vocational psychology (pp. 1–44). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Saks, A. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (1997). A longitudinal investigation of the relationships
between job information sources, applicant perceptions of ﬁt, and work outcomes.
Personnel Psychology, 50, 395–427.
Saks, A. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (2002). Is job search related to employment
quality? It all depends on the ﬁt. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 646–654.
doi:10.1037/0021–9010.87.4.646
Smith, P. C., Kendall, L. M., & Hulin, C. L. (1985). The job descriptive index. Bowling
Green, OH: Bowling Green State University.
Swanson, J. L. (1996). The theory is the practice: Trait-and-factor/person–
environment ﬁt counseling. In M. L. Savickas & W. B. Walsh (Eds.), Handbook of
career counseling theory and practice (pp. 93–108). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Swanson, J. L. (2012). Work and psychological health. In N. A. Fouad, J. A. Carter &
L. M. Subich (Eds.), APA handbook of counseling psychology. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment

53

Swanson, J. L., & Chu, S. P. (2000). Applications of person–environment psychology
to the career development and vocational behavior of adolescents and adults. In
M. E. Martin, Jr., & J. L. Swartz-Kulstad (Eds.), Person–environment psychology and
mental health: Assessment and intervention (pp. 143–168). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Swanson, J. L., & Fouad, N. A. (2010). Career theory and practice: Learning through case
studies (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Walsh, W. B., Price, R. H., & Craik, K. H. (1992). Person–environment psychology: An
introduction. In W. B. Walsh, K. H. Craik, & R. H. Price (Eds.), Person–environment
psychology: Models and perspectives (pp. vii–xi). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weiss, D. J., Dawis, R. V., England, G. W., & Lofquist, L. H. (1967). Manual for the
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire. Minnesota Studies in Vocational Rehabilitation
(No. XXII), 1–119. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, Industrial Relations
Center.
Withrow, R. L., & Shoffner, M. F. (2006). Applying the theory of work adjustment
to clients with symptoms of anorexia nervosa. Journal of Career Development, 32,
366–377. doi:10.1177/0894845305284706
Zedeck, S. (Ed.). (2010). APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Zytowski, D. G. (2006). Super Work Values Inventory-revised: Technical manual.
Retrieved from http://www.kuder.com

CHAPTER 3

Holland’s Theory of Vocational
Choice and Adjustment
MARGARET M. NAUTA

W

HEN JOHN HOLLAND INTRODUCED a theory of vocational choice in 1959,

his goal was to present a framework that would be practical for
counselors and clients to use. His work as a career counselor
in educational, military, and clinical settings helped provide Holland with
a sense of what was needed and what would be useful. He concluded
that simplicity was critical: If a theory was too complex for counselors to
explain and for clients to remember and reﬂect on, it ran the risk of being
underutilized. Therefore, Holland strove to articulate a theory that would be
sufﬁciently robust to explain important outcomes and yet simple enough to
be user-friendly. It is safe to say he accomplished this goal with resounding
success. Holland revised and reﬁned his theory numerous times based on
results from empirical studies he and others conducted to test elements of
the theory. Now Holland’s theory is generally regarded as among the most
inﬂuential theories guiding career counseling and practice.
This chapter serves as an introduction to Holland’s (1997b) theory of
vocational choice and is divided into three major sections:
1. An overview of the theory and its predictions
2. A summary of research on the theory, including its applicability to
diverse populations
3. A discussion of how the theory can be applied to career issues that arise
over the life span with diverse populations
The chapter concludes with a series of take-home messages that summarize
for practitioners the key parts of the theory and their implications for career
interventions.
55

56

Career Development and Counseling

OVERVIEW OF THE THEORY
The essence of Holland’s theory is that both people and environments can
be described in terms of their resemblance to six model, or theoretical,
types. The interrelationships among the types provide the basis for several
predictions about the kinds of careers people will choose, how satisﬁed they
will be with their work, how well they will perform in their work, and the
ease with which they will be able to make career decisions.
The Six Types of Persons and Environments
According to Holland, by late adolescence most people can be characterized in terms of how closely they resemble each of six basic personality
types: Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising, and Conventional (commonly abbreviated with the acronym RIASEC). Each type has a
unique constellation of preferred activities, self-beliefs, abilities, and values,
as summarized in Table 3.1. Readers are encouraged to consult Holland
(1997b) for more detailed descriptions of the personality types.
Describing how the RIASEC personality types develop was not a central
goal of Holland’s, but he suggested they are likely the result of a complex
interaction among ‘‘a variety of cultural and personal forces including
peers, biological heredity, parents, social class, culture, and the physical
environment’’ (Holland, 1997b, p. 2). Based on these inﬂuences, Holland
believed people ﬁrst begin to prefer some activities over others, and then
these preferences become strong interests and areas of competence that lead
them to seek some experiences and to avoid others. This further reinforces
their interests and abilities such that over time, the interests, areas of
competence, and resulting self-beliefs become dispositional and can be used
to make predictions about people’s future choices and behaviors.
In arguing for the presence of six basic types, Holland did not assert that
people represent only a single type. Many individuals have a dominant type
that they most closely resemble plus one or more additional types (called
subtypes) that they also resemble to some degree. Accordingly, Holland
recommended using the rank-ordering of all six types to describe people.
Considering all possible combinations of the rank-ordered six types, there
are 720 different personality proﬁle patterns that can exist. Therefore, while
providing simplicity by allowing us to think about individuals in terms
of six dimensions, the theory actually allows for quite a bit of complexity
and diversity among those individuals. In practice, many counselors use a
three-point code—called a Holland code—that is made up of the ﬁrst letters
of the three types a client most resembles. Thus, if a client most resembles
the Social type, but also shows a reasonable degree of resemblance to the

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

57

Artistic and Enterprising types in descending order, he or she would have a
three-point Holland code of SAE.
To assess a client’s resemblance to the RIASEC types, counselors can
use instruments developed by Holland and his colleagues, including the
Vocational Preference Inventory (VPI; Holland, 1985b) and the Self Directed
Search (SDS; Holland, Fritzsche, & Powell, 1994). RIASEC scales have also
been created for almost all major career interest inventories, including the
Strong Interest Inventory (SII; Donnay, Morris, Schaubhut, & Thompson,
2004), the Unisex Edition of the ACT Interest Inventory (Swaney, 1995),
and the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (U.S. Department of
Defense, 1994) (see Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume). These instruments
provide RIASEC interest scores, which are more narrowly deﬁned than are
the broader RIASEC type scores from the SDS (which include information
about other personal attributes, in addition to interests), but, in practice,
interest and type scores are usually used in the same way. In addition,
the RIASEC dimensions serve as the organizing framework for instruments
measuring other career-relevant constructs, such as people’s beliefs about
their abilities (e.g., the Skills Conﬁdence Inventory; Betz, Borgen, & Harmon,
2004).
Holland proposed that, like people, work and educational environments
can also be categorized in terms of their resemblance to the six RIASEC
types. Each environment type presents unique opportunities and tends to
require different skills of its incumbents (see Table 3.1). Readers can consult
Gottfredson and Holland (1996) and Holland (1997a) for more complete lists
and detailed descriptions of the environment types. As with people, some
environments are quite complex and resemble multiple RIASEC types, so
again the rank-ordering of multiple types is useful, and three-point Holland
codes are often used to describe environments as well.
One way to determine an environment’s type is on the basis of the personalities of the people working in it because, as Holland explained, ‘‘where
people congregate, they create an environment that reﬂects the types they
most resemble’’ (Holland, 1997b, p. 3). Thus, an environment comprising
mostly workers with CRE personalities would be considered a CRE environment. Alternatively, an environment can be described based on the types
of activities in which people in it usually engage. The Position Classiﬁcation
Inventory (PCI; Gottfredson & Holland, 1991) allows employees or supervisors to rate the frequency with which a job involves various activities,
values, and perspectives that are grouped by RIASEC type. Three-point
Holland codes are also available for hundreds of occupations in the Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes (DHOC; Gottfredson & Holland, 1996);
ancillary materials to the SDS, such as the Occupations Finder (Holland,
1996) and Educational Opportunities Finder (Holland, 1997a); and in many

58

Career Development and Counseling

Table 3.1
Characteristics of Holland’s RIASEC Personality and Environment Types
Realistic

Investigative

Preference for working with: things

Preference for working with: things and ideas

Personality characteristics: frank, practical,
focused, mechanical, determined, rugged

Personality characteristics: analytical,
intellectual, reserved, independent, ambitious

Preferred/typical activities and skills:
mechanical, manual, physical, and athletic
tasks

Preferred/typical activities and skills: working
with abstract ideas, solving intellectual
problems, collecting data

Sample careers: Fitness trainer, ﬁreﬁghter,
mechanic, builder, farmer, landscaper

Sample careers: biologist, researcher,
physician, mathematician, computer systems
analyst

Sample majors: criminal justice studies,
athletic training, construction management

Sample majors: botany, engineering,
mathematics, premed, food technology

Values: tradition, freedom, independence

Values: independence, logic, scholarly
achievement

Artistic

Social

Preference for working with: ideas and
people

Preference for working with: people

Personality characteristics: cooperative,
Personality characteristics: complicated,
original, impulsive, independent, expressive, helpful, empathic, kind, tactful, warm,
sociable, generous
creative
Preferred/typical activities and skills: using
imagination, creative expression

Preferred/typical activities and skills:
interacting with and helping people, teaching,
guiding

Sample careers: artist, musician, actor,
creative writer, photographer

Sample careers: teacher, clergy, counselor,
nurse, school bus monitor

Sample majors: art, theater, graphic design,
music

Sample majors: nursing, education,
counseling, social work

Values: aesthetic experience,
self-expression, imagination, nonconformity

Values: altruism, ethics, equality

Enterprising

Conventional

Preference for working with: data and
people

Preference for working with: data and things

Personality characteristics: careful,
conforming, conservative, responsible,
Personality characteristics: persuasive,
energetic, sociable, adventurous, ambitious, controlled
assertive
Preferred/typical activities and skills: ordering,
Preferred/typical activities and skills: leading, attending to details
managing, persuading, and organizing
people

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

59

Table 3.1 (Continued)
Sample careers: manager, lawyer, business
administrator, politician

Sample careers: accountant, banker, actuary,
editor, ofﬁce manager, librarian

Sample majors: prelaw, business
management, political science

Sample majors: business, accounting

Values: tradition, economic achievement,
ambition

Values: tradition, ambition, obedience,
economic achievement, comfort

Source: Adapted from Gottfredson and Holland (1996), Holland (1997a, 1997b), Prediger (1982).

other sources of occupational information, including the U.S. Department of
Labor–sponsored O*NET database (see Gore, Leuwerke, & Kelly, Chapter 18,
this volume).
Predictions Based on Relationships Among the Types
In striving for a theory that was simple enough to be widely used, Holland
willingly sacriﬁced some detail and predictive power. He maintained that
a more complex theory involving more than six types or more constructs
would be impractical. Nevertheless, Holland recognized that it was important to acknowledge the limits of the theory and to place it in context.
Therefore, he introduced his theory with an ‘‘other things being equal’’
(1997b, p. 12) qualiﬁer, explaining that the theory is useful for understanding
individuals’ career choices after controlling for age, gender, social class, and
other inﬂuences that limit opportunities or the range of careers a person can
or does consider.
After the inﬂuence of these other factors has been accounted for, Holland
suggested that the interrelationships among the RIASEC personality and
environment types allow us to make several predictions about people’s
career choices, satisfaction, and performance. Four important constructs
related to these predictions are congruence, differentiation, consistency, and
identity.
Congruence. The most important part of Holland’s theory is the idea that an
individual’s personality is better suited to some environments than to others.
He asserted that people search for and enter environments that permit them
to ‘‘exercise their skills and abilities, express their attitudes and values,
and take on agreeable problems and roles’’ (p. 4). In other words, people
seek environments that ﬁt well with their personalities. Environments also
seek good-ﬁtting employees via their recruitment and selection of people
with desired characteristics. Thus, like the theory of work adjustment (see

60

Career Development and Counseling

Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume), Holland’s theory is an
exemplar of the person–environment ﬁt (Dawis, 2000) approach.
Holland used the term congruence to refer to the degree of ﬁt between an
individual and his or her current or projected environment with respect to
the RIASEC types. The more similar the personality is to the environment, the
more congruent are the two. A person with an RIA personality working in an
RIA environment has a very high level of congruence. That same individual
working in an RIE environment would have slightly lower congruence,
and that person in an SEC environment would have a very low degree of
congruence.
In research and practice, congruence has been operationalized in many
ways. The simplest measure considers only the match between the ﬁrst
letters of the person’s and the environment’s Holland codes, whereas other
congruence indices consider the rank ordering of two or more personality
and environment types (see Brown & Gore, 1994; Camp & Chartrand, 1992;
Young, Tokar, & Subich, 1998, for summaries and evaluations of congruence
indices).
Holland theorized that congruence is a determinant of several important outcomes, including people’s career aspirations and choices, work
satisfaction, job stability, and performance. Speciﬁcally, he predicted that:
• People will tend to aspire to and choose educational and work environ-

ments that are congruent with their personalities.
• When people are in environments that are highly congruent with their

personalities, they will be more satisﬁed and successful, and they will
remain in those environments longer, resulting in greater stability (i.e.,
fewer job changes) over the life span.
Differentiation. A minority of people and environments resemble one
RIASEC type almost exclusively (i.e., are ‘‘pure’’ types), whereas other
people and environments are similar to many of the types. Holland used the
term differentiation to describe the degree to which a person or environment
is clearly deﬁned with respect to the RIASEC types.
People with high levels of differentiation show a strong resemblance to
one RIASEC type and little resemblance to other types, whereas people with
low levels of differentiation have similar degrees of resemblance to many of
the types. The lowest degree of differentiation is present in the proﬁle of a
person who receives identical scores on all six RIASEC scores when taking
an inventory such as the SDS. Among people, Holland operationalized
differentiation as the difference between the highest and lowest scores for
the six types. Other differentiation indices, for example, the distance between
the highest and lowest scores that comprise a person’s three-point Holland

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

61

code, have also been used (see Alvi, Khan, & Kirkwood, 1990, for descriptions
of several differentiation indices).
Highly differentiated work environments have employees and activities
that clearly align with one RIASEC type and few of the others. An example
is an auto repair shop in which all of the employees are primarily engaged in
hands-on, mechanical work that exempliﬁes the Realistic type, even though
some may specialize in electronic systems, others in body work, and still
others in engine repair. Environments made up of employees with varied
RIASEC types or that require many different kinds of work activities have
low levels of differentiation. An example is a medical ofﬁce complex in which
there are physicians (primary I type), nurses (primary S type), and medical
records clerks (primary C type), whose work activities can be quite disparate.
Work environment differentiation can be quantiﬁed by having employees or
supervisors rate the environment with the PCI and then using indices that
are analogous to those used to calculate personality differentiation.
Holland theorized that differentiation has implications for the process
of career decision making and that it moderates the relationships between
congruence and its outcomes. People with highly differentiated personalities should be drawn to a narrow range of occupational areas with which
there is obvious congruence, but people with highly undifferentiated personalities can have difﬁculty making career decisions because they feel torn
between multiple areas that are equally attractive (or equally unappealing,
in the case of low, undifferentiated personality proﬁles). Likewise, because
highly differentiated environments are more predictable (i.e., are easier to
identify and involve more activities typically associated with a given type),
they should more easily attract highly congruent employees. Accordingly,
Holland predicted that:
• Personality differentiation is positively associated with ease of career

decision making. Therefore, individuals with highly undifferentiated
personalities may struggle to a greater degree with making career
choices.
• The positive relationships between congruence and work satisfaction,
success, and stability will be stronger when differentiation (either personality, environmental, or both) is greater.
Consistency. Each RIASEC type, whether personality or environment, has
more in common with some types than with others. When examining the
pattern of correlations among RIASEC scores, Holland and his colleagues
(Holland, Whitney, Cole, & Richards, 1969) discovered a roughly circular
ordering of types and subsequently presented what has become an icon in
career development and assessment: the Holland hexagon (see Figure 3.1).

62

Career Development and Counseling

.46

Realistic

Investigative

.16
.36

.30

.34

.16
.16
.11

Conventional

.21
.68

Artistic
.35

.30

.42
.38

Enterprising

.54

Social

Figure 3.1 Holland’s Hexagonal Model of the Relationships Among Personality
and Environment Types
Source: From J. L. Holland, D. R. Whitney, N. S. Cole, & J. M Richards, Jr. (1969). An empirical
occupational classiﬁcation derived from a theory of personality and intended for practice and research
(ACT Research Report No. 29). Iowa City, IA: American College Testing Program. Copyright 1969 by the
American College Testing Program. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission from ACT, Inc.

As shown by the correlations among the RIASEC type scores in Figure 3.1,
when the RIASEC types are placed, in order, on the points around a hexagon,
those on adjacent points (e.g., R and I) are more similar than those that are
more distant (e.g., R and A). Those that are diametrically opposed (e.g., R
and S) share the least in common. This underlying structure, or calculus—in
which the RIASEC types are equidistantly located around the hexagon
and there is an inverse relationship between distances on the hexagon
and similarity—provides a means for determining the degree to which
there is relative harmony versus discordance among the types a person or
environment most closely resembles.
When the types that make up a person’s or environment’s Holland code are
adjacent on the hexagon (i.e., are more similar), the person or environment
has a high degree of what Holland called consistency. For instance, the
Social and Enterprising types, while having distinct characteristics, share
a common element of involving work with people (Prediger, 1982). A low
level of consistency is present when the types making up a person’s or
environment’s Holland code are diametrically opposed (e.g., I and E) and
have little in common. For example, a highly inconsistent work environment
requires a combination of interests and abilities that are rarely required in
the same job and that few people have. Consistency is frequently calculated
by examining the position of the ﬁrst two letters of the three-letter person or
environment Holland code on the hexagon, although more complex methods
for determining consistency have also been used (see Strahan, 1987).

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

63

Among both people and environments, consistency is more the norm
than the exception. For example, the DHOC lists only two occupations as
having the highly inconsistent ACS Holland code, whereas over 80 are listed
that have the highly consistent CER Holland code. As a result, people with
more consistent personalities will be able to consider and choose from more
occupations that allow them to express most of the key elements of their
personalities. Similarly, highly consistent environments should be able to
recruit from a larger pool of employees with highly congruent personalities.
Accordingly, Holland predicted that:
• Consistency is positively associated with ease of career decision making.

People with highly inconsistent personalities may be more challenged
when attempting to ﬁnd highly congruent environments.
• Consistency moderates the relationships between congruence and its
outcomes. The relationships between congruence and work satisfaction,
performance, and stability will be stronger when consistency (either
personality, environmental, or both) is high.
Identity. Finally, Holland noted that some people and environments are
more clearly deﬁned and have more stability over time than do others.
Identity refers to the degree to which a person has ‘‘a clear and stable picture
of one’s goals, interests, and talents’’ (Holland, 1997b, p. 5) and can be
assessed using the Identity Scale of My Vocational Situation (MVS; Holland,
Daiger, & Power, Holland et al., 1980). Strong environmental identity is
present when an environment or organization has clear, integrated goals,
tasks, and rewards that are stable over long time intervals. A work setting with a limited range of highly related positions that remain the same
over time would have a strong, or crystallized, identity, whereas a work
setting with varied positions that change frequently has a more diffuse
identity. Holland indicated that one way to operationalize environmental identity is to take the inverse of the number of occupations within a
work setting. For example, a small business with employees in four different
occupations—such as salesperson, marketing executive, administrative assistant, and product designer—would have an identity of 0.25 (the inverse of 4).
Theoretically, identity is strongly related to differentiation and consistency because people or environments with high degrees of differentiation
and consistency are expected to have clearer, stabler goals. In fact, Holland considered identity to be somewhat redundant with differentiation
and consistency, but he thought identity provides a more direct measure of
‘‘how well a person deﬁnes himself or herself’’ (1997b, p. 33).
As with differentiation and consistency, Holland expected that:
• A

stronger, well-deﬁned identity promotes ease in career decision
making.

64

Career Development and Counseling

• Identity moderates the relationships between congruence and its out-

comes. Speciﬁcally, congruence will have stronger positive relationships
with work satisfaction, stability, and performance when identity (either
of the person, the environment, or both) is well deﬁned.
Summary
In summary, when all else is equal, Holland predicted that individuals
who have highly consistent and differentiated personality proﬁles should
have more crystallized identities, make career decisions with greater ease,
and experience greater stability in their career trajectories. Those with
less differentiated, less consistent proﬁles may have more diffuse identities,
struggle more with career decision making, and have less stable career paths.
He expected that people will seek environments that are congruent with
their personalities, and when they do so, they will ‘‘probably do competent
work, be satisﬁed and personally effective, and engage in appropriate social
and educational behavior’’ (Holland, 1997b, p. 40). Likewise, environments
characterized by a high degree of consistency and differentiation that possess
a clear identity are expected to have employees with higher levels of
satisfaction, stability, and productivity.

RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR HOLLAND’S THEORY
Holland’s theory consists of easily quantiﬁable constructs and predictions
that lend themselves well to scientiﬁc investigation. Consequently, hundreds
of studies examining aspects of Holland’s theory have been conducted.
We now know a great deal about many parts of the theory, including
its applicability to diverse populations. Several meta-analyses (Assouline &
Meir, 1987; Spokane, Meir, & Catalano, 2000; Tracey & Rounds, 1993; Tsabari,
Tziner, & Meir, 2005) and reviews of the empirical status of Holland’s theory
(e.g., Carson & Mowsesian, 1993; Holland, 1997b; Nauta, 2010; Spokane,
1985) provide a more in-depth analysis of this body of research, but some of
the larger trends are summarized here.
Research on the Types and Their Interrelationships
Much research has been devoted to verifying that the RIASEC types exist
among people and environments and that they possess the characteristics
described by Holland (1997b). Researchers have also tested the degree to
which the types and their interrelationships are invariant across segments of
the population.

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

65

Existence of the types. Because Holland’s theory relies on six types as the
basis for matching people to environments, it has been critical to establish
that the RIASEC types do, in fact, exist. Numerous studies have provided
evidence that people’s self-descriptions (e.g., on adjective checklists or interest inventories) cluster together in ways that resemble Holland’s types. This
has been shown to be true among a wide variety of individuals, including
high school students (e.g., Holland, 1962), college students (e.g., Edwards &
Whitney, 1972), and working adults (e.g., Rachman, Amernic, & Aranya,
1981). There is also support for the existence of the types among environments, because workers’ and job analysts’ descriptions of workplace
requirements and rewards often group together in ways that resemble the
RIASEC types when subjected to factor or cluster analyses (e.g., Donnay
& Borgen, 1996; Rounds, Smith, Hubert, Lewis, & Rivkin, 1999). Of course,
documenting the presence of the RIASEC types does not mean this is the only
structure or valid mechanism for categorizing persons and environments, but
Holland’s six types do seem to provide a reasonable heuristic for doing so.
Relations to other constructs. Many studies have linked people’s RIASEC
scores with scores on measures of other constructs, and the ﬁndings have
tended to be fairly consistent with Holland’s descriptions of the types. For
example, RIASEC scores are related in ways that are consistent with Holland’s type descriptions to people’s values (Williams, 1972) and life goals
(Astin & Nichols, 1964), as well as to some of the Big Five personality factors
(e.g., Larson, Rottinghaus, & Borgen, 2002) and measures of actual or perceived ability (e.g., Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997; Betz, Harmon, & Borgen,
1996). RIASEC environment types have also been shown to have many characteristics that are consistent with Holland’s descriptions (Maurer & Tarulli,
1997), although there has been less research on the environment types than
on the personality types. Overall, Holland’s framing of the model RIASEC
types as broad constructs (i.e., collections of interests and other attributes,
like values and abilities) seems well founded.
Stability over time. Holland’s conceptualization of the RIASEC personality
types as being dispositional by late adolescence has also been critical to
verify empirically. After all, it would be of little practical value to use the
RIASEC types as the basis for seeking congruent future environments if
people’s resemblance to those types ﬂuctuates tremendously. Studies have
documented a good degree of stability for RIASEC type scores for late
adolescents and adults over fairly short time periods. For example, the
test–retest stability of RIASEC scores on the SDS for a sample that included
high school students, college students, and adults ranged from .76 to .89 over
periods of up to 12 weeks (Holland et al., 1994).

66

Career Development and Counseling

A larger body of literature has examined the stability of RIASEC interests
(again, just one component of the Holland types) as assessed by instruments
such as the SII. Because some of these studies have used lengthier followup intervals, they provide more useful information about the degree to
which RIASEC scores can be considered traitlike. Consistent with Holland’s
dispositional view, ﬁndings from their meta-analysis of interest stability
research led Low, Yoon, Roberts, and Rounds (2005) to conclude that RIASEC
interests are reasonably stable between the ages of 12 and 40 and are
comparable to personality traits and abilities in terms of their level of stability.
Low and colleagues did ﬁnd, however, that interests became noticeably more
stable after the age of 18. Across studies that assessed RIASEC interests
using retest periods of over 1 year, Low and colleagues found that Realistic
and Artistic interests tended to be stabler over time than Enterprising and
Conventional interests, but all the types exhibited sufﬁcient stability to
support the practice of RIASEC interest assessment in career counseling.
Nevertheless, note that some individuals’ interests change substantially over
time (see Swanson, 1999). Holland (1997b) explained such ﬂuctuations in
terms of inconsistent, undifferentiated proﬁles or a more diffuse identity,
but as will be discussed later, these explanations have received only mixed
support.
Group differences. There appear to be some reliable differences in RIASEC
score levels across segments of the population. The largest of these differences
is with respect to gender. On most measures, women tend to outscore men
on the Social type, and men tend to score higher than women on the Realistic
type (e.g., Fouad, 2002; Tracey & Robbins, 2005). It is also not uncommon
for women to score higher than men on the Artistic type (Fouad, 2002).
Differences by age and racial/ethnic group tend to be fairly small in size.
One study found that Asian Americans scored higher on measures of the
Investigative type than did members of other racial/ethnic groups (Fouad,
2002), but most other studies (e.g., Fouad & Mohler, 2004) have not found
such differences. The gender and racial/ethnic group differences in RIASEC
scores probably reﬂect the different kinds of experiences and opportunities
people have as they are growing up (Holland, 1997b).
The structure of types. A good deal of research—and much of the recent
research on Holland’s theory—has investigated the degree to which Holland’s hexagon provides a good representation of the relationships among
the RIASEC types. Not surprisingly, given that the hexagon ﬁgure was
articulated on the basis of known correlations among RIASEC type scores,
ﬁndings from many studies have generally supported the RIASEC ordering

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

67

of types among people and environments. That is, types that are adjacent on
the hexagon have consistently been found to be more strongly related than
are nonadjacent types (e.g., Armstrong & Rounds, 2008; Darcy & Tracey,
2007). However, because there is less support for the ﬁt of a strict model
that speciﬁes equal distances between the points of the hexagon (e.g., Armstrong, Hubert, & Rounds, 2003), many writers (e.g., Armstrong & Rounds,
2008; Darcy & Tracey, 2007) now refer more generally to a RIASEC circular
ordering, or ‘‘circumplex,’’ rather than to a hexagonal structure per se.
With a few exceptions (e.g., Rounds & Tracey, 1996), most studies have
found that the ﬁt of the RIASEC circumplex in mostly U.S. samples is either
invariant or varies to a fairly small degree based on gender and race/ethnicity
(Armstrong et al., 2003; Darcy & Tracey, 2007; Rounds & Tracey, 1993;
Ryan, Tracey, & Rounds, 1996) and socioeconomic status (Ryan et al., 1996).
Gender differences in the RIASEC structure may be more pronounced among
individuals who are racial/ethnic minorities (Kantamneni & Fouad, 2011),
however. In addition, the RIASEC model’s ﬁt appears to vary somewhat
among people of different nationalities, especially in Asian countries (e.g.,
Armstrong & Rounds, 2008; Yang, Stokes, & Hui, 2005). The model also
does not ﬁt well in younger (elementary and junior high school) samples
(Lent, Tracey, Brown, Soresi, & Nota, 2006; Tracey & Ward, 1998). Asian
Americans and residents of Asian countries have also been found to exhibit
lower levels of congruence with anticipated and chosen occupations than
other racial/ethnic groups (Fouad & Mohler, 2004; Gupta & Tracey, 2005).
Thus, counselors must be cautious when using the hexagon framework to
interpret RIASEC scores with younger adolescents and with those residing
in Asia. Otherwise, the framework seems to work well.
Research Testing Holland’s Predictions About
Work-Related Outcomes
Another critical area of research has examined the validity of Holland’s predictions about work-related outcomes on the basis of his theory’s constructs.
Of these, Holland’s predictions about outcomes associated with congruence
have received the most attention.
Congruence in relation to choice, satisfaction, and performance. There is good
evidence that RIASEC type and interest scores are predictive of many individuals’ choices of college majors and careers (see Betz, 2008; Holland, 1997b).
That is, people frequently choose majors and careers that are congruent with
their dominant RIASEC type(s). Congruence with respect to the RIASEC
types is also predictive of people’s persistence or stability in college majors

68

Career Development and Counseling

and occupations (e.g., Donohue, 2006; Tracey & Robbins, 2006). Moreover,
people who change jobs often switch to ones that are more congruent with
their personalities than the ones they left (Oleski & Subich, 1996). These ﬁndings all support Holland’s basic assumption that people seek environments
with which their personalities are congruent.
Meta-analyses have also supported Holland’s prediction that person–
environment congruence with respect to the RIASEC types is associated
with favorable outcomes. These studies have conﬁrmed that congruence is
positively associated with job satisfaction (Assouline & Meir, 1987; Spokane
et al., 2000; Tsabari et al., 2005) and, to a lesser extent, performance (Spokane
et al., 2000; Tsabari et al., 2005). However, the sizes of these effects tend to
be small. For example, Tsabari and colleagues’ (2005) meta-analysis revealed
a mean congruence–satisfaction correlation of .17, and Assouline and Meir
(1987) found a mean congruence–academic achievement correlation of only
.06. Although methodological limitations of studies and narrow samples
may partially explain the modest relationships between congruence and
work-related outcomes, it is clearly the case that congruence should be
considered only one of many factors that predict important work-related
outcomes.
Differentiation and consistency. Holland’s differentiation and consistency
hypotheses have received less attention than those regarding congruence,
and from the studies that have examined differentiation and consistency
as predictors of work-related outcomes (see Carson & Mowsesian, 1993),
there is mixed empirical support for the theory. In fact, Holland (1985a)
characterized this body of ﬁndings as ‘‘checkered’’ because there have been
both positive and negative ﬁndings. Even among the studies that have found
support for Holland’s predictions that differentiation and consistency are
predictive of career decision-making ease, career choice stability, and work
satisfaction, the relationships tend to be fairly small in magnitude.
Identity. Holland’s predictions about vocational identity’s positive associations with differentiation and consistency, career decision-making ease,
career stability, and performance have received fairly minimal empirical
attention, perhaps because this construct was added only to later versions of
the theory. As with the ﬁndings regarding differentiation and consistency,
the pattern of ﬁndings regarding identity is best described as checkered.
The hypothesized positive associations of identity to consistency and differentiation were not supported in one study (Leung, Conoley, Scheel, &
Sonnenberg, 1992). Although having a stronger identity does seem to be
associated with some beneﬁts, such as readiness to make career decisions
(Hirschi, 2007) and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy (Gushue, Scanlan,

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

69

Pantzer, & Clarke, 2006), other studies (Blinne & Johnston, 1998; Leung,
1998) have yielded mixed or null results regarding the relation of vocational
identity to predicted outcomes. Environmental identity was linked to job
satisfaction in one study (Perdue, Reardon, & Peterson, 2007) but otherwise
has received little empirical attention.
Summary
In summary, there is empirical support for many aspects of Holland’s theory.
The presence of the RIASEC types has been well documented, and the types’
interrelationships appear to be fairly consistent across major segments of
the U.S. population, although the generalizability of the RIASEC model to
those of Asian nationalities is less clear. RIASEC type or interest scores
contribute substantially to the prediction of people’s choices of college
majors and careers, and congruence with respect to the RIASEC types is
also associated with the stability of those choices. Congruence is positively
related to work satisfaction and performance, although the magnitude of
those relationships is not as substantial as Holland might have believed
they would be. Support for Holland’s predictions involving the secondary
constructs of consistency, differentiation, and identity is less robust.
APPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY
When evaluating theories with respect to the degree to which they help career
counselors and clients in practice, Holland’s (1997b) theory is unsurpassed,
as it serves as the guiding framework for more career interventions than any
other theory.
Contributions to Occupational Classiﬁcation
and Career Assessment
There is little doubt that Holland’s theory has helped to transform the
practice of career counseling. Prior to the theory’s introduction, clients
could take an interest inventory and receive scores that reﬂected their
similarity to employees in various occupations. The challenge for counselors,
however, was to help clients understand how those occupations ﬁt together
in some coherent way and to extrapolate beyond the limited number of
occupations represented on the inventory itself. Holland’s theory allows us
to think about people and environments using a manageable number of
dimensions, thereby facilitating clients’ understanding of themselves and
the world of work. In addition, Holland’s instruments for assessing the
RIASEC personality types, the introduction of RIASEC scales on major
interest inventories (e.g., Campbell & Holland, 1972), and the development

70

Career Development and Counseling

of parallel RIASEC environmental classiﬁcation materials (e.g., the DHOC)
have greatly improved clients’ and counselors’ ability to generate fairly
comprehensive lists of possible careers that warrant consideration.
Because of this user-friendliness, Holland’s theory has been widely
adopted. It serves as the organizing framework for many self-help systems,
such as the best-selling What Color Is Your Parachute? (Bolles, 1986). Holland’s
SDS and its supporting materials were designed for self-administration and
interpretation, which has contributed to the theory’s widespread use in educational and career workshops. Finally, Holland’s theory frequently guides
individual career counseling interventions (see Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000).
From the perspective of Holland’s theory, career intervention involves
using the RIASEC typology to characterize a client’s personality in order to
understand how she or he may best ﬁt with the world of work. Typically,
this is done using the SDS or an interest inventory that has RIASEC scales,
although counselors can also gather information about a client’s resemblance
to the RIASEC types in a clinical interview. In such an interview, the counselor
helps the client verbalize and explore her or his preferred activities, perceived
competencies, self-beliefs, interests, values, and occupational daydreams.
The counselor then explains Holland’s model to the client, and together they
work to determine the client’s resemblance to each of the types. Regardless of
the way in which the assessment occurs, an interpretation typically focuses
on determining the client’s three-letter Holland code. The client can then
use environmental classiﬁcation materials to explore environments with
which his or her personality is fairly congruent. Counselors can also use
the constructs of differentiation, consistency, and identity to help clients
understand the sources of career decision-making difﬁculties they may be
experiencing and to identify possible ways to reduce those difﬁculties. In
general, counseling is intended to ‘‘create self understanding and stimulate
more insightful and constructive planning’’ (Holland, 1997b, p. 199).
Using this general framework, counselors can address many kinds of
client needs, including helping people who are seeking to make or remake
educational or career choices, promoting greater career/work satisfaction
and performance, preparing people to implement career choices, and promoting optimum career development among younger persons. The manner
in which counselors who use Holland’s theory might address each of these
concerns is discussed next.
Working With Persons Who Are Seeking to Make or Remake
Educational or Career Choices
Because it provides a parallel way for conceptualizing people and environments, Holland’s theory is optimally suited for assisting people who are

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

71

seeking to make initial or subsequent educational or career choices. Once a
client’s Holland code is known, a counselor can assist the client in consulting
the Occupations Finder, the Educational Opportunities Finder, the DHOC, the
O*NET database, and other environmental classiﬁcation materials to explore
occupations that are congruent with his or her three-letter Holland code.
Because, at least after adolescence, RIASEC type scores tend to be fairly stable
for most people, and because congruence is associated (albeit modestly) with
work satisfaction and performance, the rationale for using this approach to
match people to environments is solid.
When using Holland’s theory as the basis for identifying potentially
satisfying educational and work environments, clients and counselors must
not use the theory in a more simplistic manner than it was intended. Several
points are worth keeping in mind.
• First, a work environment need not be completely congruent with a

client’s personality to be rewarding. Although occupations with threepoint Holland codes that are dramatically different from the client’s
personality might be tentatively eliminated to allow greater focus in
career exploration, exploration for most clients would ideally be inclusive of occupations with several Holland codes. For example, a client
with an ASI personality would be encouraged to consider and explore
occupations with Holland types of all combinations of the ASI types
(e.g., ASI, AIS, SAI, SIA), particularly if the person’s proﬁle does not
show a high degree of differentiation (i.e., if the scores are not spread
very far apart). Also, although in practice it is common to use threepoint person and environment Holland codes, Holland recommended
using the rank-ordering of all six types as part of an analysis of congruence. Depending on the degree to which the client also resembles types
beyond the tertiary type, additional categories of occupations (e.g., ASE)
may also be recommended for exploration.
• Second, although congruence is positively associated with favorable
work-related outcomes, the strength of these associations is at best
modest. Clearly, congruence can be an important determinant of work
satisfaction for some people, but it is essential for counselors and clients
to view congruence with respect to the RIASEC types as only one of
many sources of information when matching clients to environments.
RIASEC congruence might best help clients understand the kinds of educational or work environments whose employees will share the most in
common with them or in which they will enjoy the typical work activities
(i.e., intrinsic work satisfaction) (Prediger, 2000). Constructs from other
theories, such as the theory of work adjustment (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume), would be an appropriate supplement for

72

Career Development and Counseling

helping clients explore environments that would provide a match for
their needs and values.
• Third, socialization and real or perceived barriers may have contributed
to clients’ having had limited experiences in areas that are nontraditional
for persons of their race or gender. This would be reﬂected on inventories such as the SDS in terms of lower RIASEC raw scores for those
nontraditional areas. A counselor would ideally work with a client to
assess whether her or his inventoried RIASEC scores accurately reﬂect
her or his authentic self. When it appears that external constraints may
have impeded development in some areas that would be intrinsically
rewarding, the counselor could then attempt to broaden career possibilities by helping the client consider how these barriers might be bypassed
or how areas of potential interest might be reconsidered (for example,
see the modiﬁed occupational card sort described by Lent, Chapter 5,
this volume).
• Fourth, Holland’s ‘‘other things being equal’’ qualiﬁer is particularly
important for work with clients who have constrained educational
or career options due to economic reality, family wishes, and other
barriers. In one sense, Holland’s theory is limited because it assumes
that people are relatively free to choose environments based on RIASEC
congruence, an assumption that clearly does not hold for all clients. In
another sense, the theory is quite ﬂexible because it paints a picture
of people and environments using broad strokes (the RIASEC types).
Although a person may not have many degrees of freedom in options
from which to choose, the theory suggests that maximizing congruence
will be beneﬁcial, so choosing from among the most congruent of
available options would be advocated. Because occupations with varied
prerequisites (e.g., levels of needed training or education) are present
within each RIASEC type, maximizing RIASEC congruence may still
be a consideration even when there are limited options from which
to choose. Helping clients with limited options identify and remove
barriers to congruent but currently unattainable options may be a way
to help them expand their occupational possibilities.
For some clients who are seeking to make educational or career choices,
engaging in self- and environmental exploration and identifying congruent environments may be a sufﬁcient intervention. For others, Holland’s
secondary constructs of differentiation, consistency, and identity may be
particularly useful to consider.
Increasing personality differentiation and helping to deﬁne more clearly
the client’s identity are common goals of counseling interventions if
the client lacks direction as a result of feeling torn between multiple
areas of comparable appeal. Helping clients achieve greater personality

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

73

differentiation by gaining more varied experiences to learn what they like
and dislike may be helpful in some cases. Using counseling sessions to
explore in more depth the areas of comparable strength of interest may
also yield additional information that helps clients prioritize some areas
over others. Occupational card sorts, such as the Missouri Occupational
Card Sort (Krieshok, Hansen, Johnston, & Wong, 2002), with Holland
code classiﬁcations for various job titles may assist a client in exploring
and articulating what it is about each RIASEC type that is appealing
or unappealing. Finally, because negative affect (e.g., depression) can
contribute to a low, undifferentiated RIASEC proﬁle, counselors might
screen for and treat mood disorders that suppress a client’s interests or
perceived competencies.
Promoting consistency is not typically a goal of career counseling, but
Holland’s consistency construct may nevertheless be useful in counseling.
First, some clients may simply experience a sense of normalization when
a counselor points to a highly inconsistent personality proﬁle as a source
of career decision-making difﬁculties. Likewise, clients with inconsistent
personalities may feel conﬂicted about their current or future career plans,
and their ambivalence can be validated by acknowledging both the pros
and cons of having diverse interests. Second, although clients with highly
inconsistent personality proﬁles may experience frustration to ﬁnd that
few environments are highly congruent with their personalities, counselors
can help such clients think creatively about new career options or tweak
existing options to maximize congruence. For example, environments with
the highly inconsistent AC combination may be rare, but a client could
brainstorm ways to maximize exposure to activities that involve the orderly
and systematic manipulation of data (C activities) within a traditionally A
environment, say, by cataloging and inventorying materials in an art library.
For other clients, it may be helpful to recognize that although expressing
highly inconsistent parts of one’s personality may be difﬁcult in a single job,
taking on temporary work, combining part-time jobs, or making planned,
periodic career changes can be legitimate options for some persons (Donnay
et al., 2004). Finally, clients with inconsistent proﬁles can be encouraged
to ﬁnd other, perhaps avocational, outlets for parts of their personalities
that are likely to be unexpressed through work. The Leisure Activities Finder
(Holmberg, Rosen, & Holland, 1997)—an ancillary to the SDS that provides
three-letter Holland codes for hobbies, sports, and other activities—may be
useful toward this end.
Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance
Another important application of Holland’s theory involves working with
people who want to experience greater job satisfaction and/or performance.

74

Career Development and Counseling

Although satisfaction and performance are clearly different outcomes,
because Holland’s predictions about sources of work satisfaction and success
are the same, interventions targeting these outcomes are nearly identical.
The primary hypothesis from the perspective of Holland’s theory is that a
person who is dissatisﬁed and/or underperforming in work may have made
a career choice that was incongruent with his or her personality in the ﬁrst
place, or there was a shifting of the primary RIASEC types within the person
or the environment such that a once congruent career choice is no longer so.
The latter would not be uncommon if, for example, the typical activities of a
workplace changed after the introduction of some new technology.
As a ﬁrst step, a counselor would gather information to assess the degree
of RIASEC congruence between the client and his or her current work
environment to test the low-congruence hypothesis. Because some work
environments are quite complex or can be idiosyncratic, it is wise not to
rely exclusively on existing environmental classiﬁcations (e.g., the DHOC) to
determine the three-letter Holland code of the client’s current environment.
Rather, it is preferable to have the client estimate the time spent in various
activities and to see if the person is in a special subunit that can be isolated
and assessed (Holland, 1997b). It may also be useful to have clients complete
the Position Classiﬁcation Inventory as a way to develop a RIASEC code for
their current jobs. Discussing the RIASEC types and the idea of congruence
with a client may provide him or her with a framework with which to
think about dissatisfaction or underperformance that may provide some
new clariﬁcation and insight.
If the low-congruence hypothesis is supported, there are several options.
The least intrusive option—and a reasonable ﬁrst step to explore with a
client—is to consider tweaking the work environment so that it is more
congruent with the client’s personality. In many work settings, there is
some ﬂexibility in how employees complete their jobs. A client could be
encouraged to ask a supervisor about shifting responsibilities or taking on
some new responsibilities that would increase congruence.
Subunits within an occupation can have different Holland codes because
they comprise employees with different types or emphasize different activities. For example, although according to the DHOC the Holland code of the
typical administrative assistant is ESC, within a large organization, some
administrative assistants may have frequent direct contact with the public,
whereas other administrative assistants’ primary responsibilities involve
little face-to-face contact with others and relatively greater emphasis on
recording data. The former subunit would likely be more congruent with a
client who has a strong resemblance to the Social type. Thus, it is possible
for a client to move toward greater congruence without changing careers
altogether. If such changes to the environment are unlikely or unappealing

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

75

to the client, then a goal of counseling might be to explore other careers or
jobs that might provide a better match, again using RIASEC environmental
classiﬁcation materials.
Theoretically, because Holland hypothesized stronger congruence–
satisfaction and congruence–performance relations under conditions of
high consistency, differentiation, and identity, working to promote a client’s
sense of identity may also be valuable, although the research support for
these hypotheses is not strong. Nonetheless, for a client with a very low
degree of personality differentiation or a poorly deﬁned identity, there might
be merit in promoting greater self-understanding and differentiation as a
way of increasing the probability of shifting to a career that is more congruent. However, keep in mind the modest strength of congruence–satisfaction
and congruence–performance relationships. RIASEC congruence is one
consideration, but a counselor would wisely explore other sources of
job satisfaction and performance as well (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22,
this volume).
Helping People Implement Career Choices
Holland’s theory has the most direct applicability for working with clients
to identify educational or career choices, but it also has some implications
for helping people implement those choices. The primary goal of a counselor
using Holland’s theory to work with a client who is ready to implement
a career choice is to identify and remove any barriers that would impede
congruence seeking. Such barriers could be external, such as when family
disapproval makes it difﬁcult for a client with a highly differentiated Artistic
personality to enter an Artistic work environment, or they could be internal,
as when low conﬁdence contributes to a client’s reluctance to attend a job
interview for a highly congruent position.
Holland’s theory may also be applicable to the implementation of career
choices by providing clients with a framework for describing to potential
employers how their abilities and characteristics map onto the position
employers are seeking to ﬁll. For example, discussing transferable skills
from a previous position may be easier when clients have a mechanism, such
as the RIASEC types, for understanding the links between a previous work
environment and a prospective work environment.
Promoting Optimum Career Development Among Children
and Adolescents
The choice-making and choice-implementing applications previously
described are primarily relevant for work with late adolescents or adults.

76

Career Development and Counseling

Indeed, this is the population that is the primary target for Holland’s theory,
and given that RIASEC type and interest scores are less stable in younger
adolescents, using RIASEC scores to narrow career choice considerations
with younger people is ill advised. Nevertheless, Holland’s theory can
be useful when working with younger adolescents to the degree that it
provides them with a rationale for learning as much as possible about
themselves and the world of work.
A counselor might help a younger client begin to think about himself or
herself and the world of work in RIASEC terms and encourage her or him to
seek opportunities related to each of the RIASEC areas, even if some areas do
not hold much initial appeal. Conceptually, knowing which RIASEC types
one does not closely resemble is important in the development of personality
differentiation and a clear vocational identity. In addition, research has
shown that thinking about career interests in terms of the RIASEC model
is associated with career decision-making beneﬁts, presumably because it
helps people understand the career information that exists and enables them
to use it better in their decision making (Tracey, 2008). Thus, interventions
with younger persons might introduce them to the RIASEC framework so
that they can use it as a schema within which to incorporate new information
they acquire about themselves and the world of work.

CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Holland’s theory provides a straightforward means for classifying personalities and work environments. The following tips for practitioners summarize
the ways in which the theory is commonly and most optimally applied.
• Practitioners seek to promote optimum career development by encour-

aging clients to learn as much as possible about themselves and work
environments. By educating clients about Holland’s theory and the
RIASEC types, counselors give clients a parallel way for thinking about
themselves and the world of work.
• Counselors assess clients’ resemblance to the RIASEC types using a
clinical interview, the SDS or VPI, and/or an interest inventory that has
RIASEC scales.
• Using environmental classiﬁcation resources, such as the DHOC, the
Educational Opportunities Finder, or the O*NET database, counselors may
assist clients in identifying potentially congruent educational and work
environments. Obviously incongruent environments might be tentatively ruled out to help clients home in on a few potentially satisfying
areas in which they are likely to perform well. Ideally, the generation of educational and career choice possibilities should, however, be

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

77

inclusive, involving not only environments with Holland codes that
match the client’s personality identically but also those with similar
Holland codes.
• RIASEC congruence is associated with favorable work-related outcomes,
including job satisfaction and performance, but not strongly so. Congruence can, therefore, be considered as one source of information, yet
counselors must also work hard to help clients consider other sources of
satisfaction and performance. Highly congruent occupations certainly
warrant consideration but without the sense that they are speciﬁcally
being prescribed by the counselor.
• Clients who are experiencing career decision-making difﬁculties may
beneﬁt from interventions designed to promote personality differentiation and the crystallization of vocational identity. Such interventions
might involve gaining more experiences in diverse areas and prioritizing
areas of interest via discussion and exploration.
• Clients with highly inconsistent personalities may need avocational
outlets for expressing parts of their personalities because there may
be few environments that will be highly congruent with all parts of
their personalities. Alternatively, such clients might need to be creative
in modifying existing positions to emphasize parts of themselves that
are not well-represented in the environment or simply plan to change
careers in the future to use parts of themselves that are not well expressed
in an initial choice.
• Once clients have identiﬁed career choices, Holland’s theory supports
the practice of removing real or perceived barriers to promote the
seeking of congruent work positions.

REFERENCES
Ackerman, P. L., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Intelligence, personality, and
interests: Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 219–245.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.121.2.219
Alvi, S. A., Khan, S. B., & Kirkwood, K. J. (1990). A comparison of various indices
of differentiation for Holland’s model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 36, 147–152.
doi:10.1016/0001-8791(90)90022-T
Armstrong, P. I., Hubert, L., & Rounds, J. (2003). Circular unidimensional scaling: A
new look at group differences in interest structure. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
50, 297–308. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.50.3.297
Armstrong, P. I., & Rounds, J. B. (2008). Vocational psychology and individual
differences. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology
(4th ed., pp. 375–391). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

78

Career Development and Counseling

Assouline, M., & Meir, E. I. (1987). Meta-analysis of the relationship between
congruence and well-being measures. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 31, 319–332.
doi:10.1016/0001-8791(82)90036-7
Astin, A. W., & Nichols, R. C. (1964). Life goals and vocational choice. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 48, 50–58. doi:10.1037/h0048653
Betz, N. E. (2008). Advances in vocational theories. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 357–374). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Betz, N. E., Borgen, F. H., & Harmon, L. W. (2004). Skills conﬁdence inventory.
Mountain View, CA: CPP.
Betz, N. E., Harmon, L. W., & Borgen, F. H. (1996). The relationships of self-efﬁcacy
for the Holland themes to gender, occupational group membership, and vocational
interests. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 90–98. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.1.90
Blinne, W. R., & Johnston, J. A. (1998). Assessing the relationships between vocational
identity, academic achievement, and persistence in college. Journal of College
Student Development, 39, 569–576.
Bolles, R. N. (1986). What color is your parachute? A practical manual for job hunters and
career changers. Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed.
Brown, S. D., & Gore, P. A. (1994). An evaluation of interest congruence indices:
Distribution characteristics and measurement properties. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 45, 310–327. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1994.1038
Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or ﬁve) sessions and a cloud of dust:
Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Camp, C. C., & Chartrand, J. M. (1992). A comparison and evaluation of interest
congruence indices. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 41, 162–182. doi:10.1016/00018791(92)90018-U
Campbell, D. P., & Holland, J. L. (1972). A merger in vocational interest research:
Applying Holland’s theory to Strong’s data. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 2,
353–376. doi:10.1016/0001-8791%2872%2990012-7
Carson, A. D., & Mowsesian, R. (1993). Moderators of the prediction of job satisfaction
from congruence: A test of Holland’s theory. Journal of Career Assessment, 2,
130–144. doi:10.1177/106907279300100203
Darcy, M. U. A., & Tracey, T. J. G. (2007). Circumplex structure of Holland’s RIASEC
interests across gender and time. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 17–31.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.54.1.17
Dawis, R. V. (2000). The person–environment tradition in counseling psychology.
In W. E. Martin Jr., & J. L. Swartz-Kulstad (Eds.), Person–environment psychology
and mental health (pp. 91–111). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Donnay, D. A. C., & Borgen, F. H. (1996). Validity, structure, and content of the
1994 Strong Interest Inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 275–291.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.3.275
Donnay, D. A. C., Morris, M. L., Schaubhut, N. A., & Thompson, R. C. (2004). Strong
Interest Inventory manual. Mountain View, CA: CPP.

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

79

Donohue, R. (2006). Person–environment congruence in relation to career change
and career persistence. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 504–515. doi:10.1016/
j.jvb.2005.11.002
Edwards, K. J., & Whitney, D. R. (1972). Structural analysis of Holland’s personality
types using factor and conﬁgural analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 19,
136–145. doi:10.1037/h0032637
Fouad, N. A. (2002). Cross-cultural differences in vocational interests: Betweengroup differences on the Strong Interest Inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
49, 283–289. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.49.3.282
Fouad, N. A., & Mohler, C. J. (2004). Cultural validity of Holland’s theory and the
Strong Interest Inventory for ﬁve racial/ethnic groups. Journal of Career Assessment,
12, 423–439.
Gottfredson, G. D., & Holland, J. L. (1991). The Position Classiﬁcation Inventory:
Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Gottfredson, G. D., & Holland, J. L. (1996). Dictionary of Holland occupational codes
(3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Gupta, S., & Tracey, T. J. G. (2005). Dharma and interest–occupation congruence in
Asian Indian college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 3, 320–336.
Gushue, G. V., Scanlan, K. R. L., Pantzer, K. M., & Clarke, C. P. (2006). The relationship
of career decision-making self-efﬁcacy, vocational identity, and career exploration
behavior in African American high school students. Journal of Career Development,
33, 19–28. doi:10.1177/0894845305283004
Hirschi, A. (2007). Holland’s secondary constructs of vocational interests and career
choice readiness of secondary students: Measures for related but different constructs. Journal of Individual Differences, 28, 205–218. doi:10.1027/1614-0001.28
.4.205
Holland, J. L. (1959). A theory of vocational choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
6, 35–45.
Holland, J. L. (1962). Some explorations of a theory of vocational choice: I. One-andtwo-year longitudinal studies. Psychological Monographs, 76(26, Whole No. 545),
49.
Holland, J. L. (1985a). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Holland, J. L. (1985b). Manual for the Vocational Preference Inventory. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1996). The occupations ﬁnder. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1997a). Educational opportunities ﬁnder. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1997b). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L., Daiger, D. C., & Power, P. G. (1980). My vocational situation. Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Holland, J. L., Fritzsche, B. A., & Powell, A. B. (1994). The Self-Directed Search technical
manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

80

Career Development and Counseling

Holland, J. L., Whitney, D. R., Cole, N. S., & Richards, J. M. (1969). An empirical
occupational classiﬁcation derived from a theory of personality and intended for practice
and research (ACT Research Report No. 29). Iowa City, IA: American College
Testing Program.
Holmberg, K., Rosen, D., & Holland, J. L. (1997). The leisure activities ﬁnder. Lutz, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Kantamneni, N., & Fouad, N. (2011). Structure of vocational interests for diverse
groups on the 2005 Strong Interest Inventory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 78,
193–201. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2010.06.003
Krieshok, T. S., Hansen, R. N., Johnston, J. A., & Wong, S. C. (2002). Missouri
occupational card sort manual. Columbia: University of Missouri.
Larson, L. M., Rottinghaus, P. J., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Meta-analyses of Big
Six interests and Big Five personality factors. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61,
217–239. doi:10.1006/jvbe.2001.1854
Lent, R. W., Tracey, T. J. G., Brown, S. D., Soresi, S., & Nota, L. (2006). Development
of interests and competency beliefs in Italian adolescents: An exploration of circumplex structure and bidirectional relationships. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
53, 181–191. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.53.2.181
Leung, S. A. (1998). Vocational identity and career choice congruence of gifted
and talented high school students. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 11, 325–335.
doi:10.1080/09515079808254064
Leung, S. A., Conoley, C. W., Scheel, M. J., & Sonnenberg, R. T. (1992). An examination
of the relation between vocational identity, consistency, and differentiation. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 40, 95–107. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(92)90049-6
Low, K. S. D., Yoon, M., Roberts, B. W., & Rounds, J. (2005). The stability of vocational
interests from early adolescence to middle adulthood: A quantitative review
of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 713–737. doi:10.1037/00332909.131.5.713
Maurer, T. J., & Tarulli, B. A. (1997). Managerial work, job analysis, and Holland’s
RIASEC vocational environment dimensions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50,
365–381. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.1549
Nauta, M. M. (2010). The development, evolution, and status of Holland’s theory of vocational personalities: Reﬂections and future directions for counseling psychology. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57, 11–22. doi:10.1111/j.14640597.2008.00375.x
Oleski, D., & Subich, L. M. (1996). Congruence and career change in employed
adults. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49, 221–229. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0041
Perdue, S. V., Reardon, R. C., & Peterson, G. W. (2007). Person–environment
congruence, self-efﬁcacy, and environmental identity in relation to job satisfaction: A career decision theory perspective. Journal of Employment Counseling, 44,
29–39.
Prediger, D. J. (1982). Dimensions underlying Holland’s hexagon: Missing link
between interests and occupations? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48, 59–67.
doi:10.1016/0001-8791(82)90036-7

Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and Adjustment

81

Prediger, D. J. (2000). Holland’s hexagon is alive and well—though somewhat
out of shape: Response to Tinsley. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56, 197–204.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.1999.1737
Rachman, D., Amernic, J., & Aranya, N. (1981). A factor-analytic study of the construct validity of Holland’s Self-Directed Search test. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 41, 425–437. doi:10.1177/001316448104100221
Rounds, J., Smith, T., Hubert, L., Lewis, P., & Rivkin, D. (1999). Development of
occupational interest proﬁles for O*Net. Raleigh, NC: National Center for O*NET
Development.
Rounds, J., & Tracey, T. J. G. (1993). Prediger’s dimensional representation
of Holland’s RIASEC circumplex. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 875–890.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.6.875
Rounds, J. B., & Tracey, T. J. G. (1996). Cross-cultural structural equivalence of
RIASEC models and measures. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 310–329.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.3.310
Ryan, J. M., Tracey, T. J. G., & Rounds, J. (1996). Generalizability of Holland’s
structure of vocational interests across ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic
status. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 330–337. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.
3.330
Spokane, A. R. (1985). A review of research on person–environment congruence
in Holland’s theory of careers [Monograph]. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 26,
306–343. doi:10.1016/0001-8791%2885%2990009-0
Spokane, A. R., Meir, E. I., & Catalano, M. (2000). Person–environment congruence
and Holland’s theory: A review and reconsideration. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
57, 137–187. doi:10.1006/jvbe.2000.1771
Strahan, R. F. (1987). Measures of consistency for Holland-type codes. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 31, 37–44. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(87)90033-9
Swaney, K. B. (1995). Technical manual: Revised unisex edition of the ACT Interest
Inventory (UNIACT). Iowa City, IA: ACT.
Swanson, J. L. (1999). Stability and change in vocational interests. In M. L. Savickas &
A. R. Spokane (Eds.), Vocational interests: Meaning, measurement, and counseling use
(pp. 135–158). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Tracey, T. J. G. (2008). Adherence to RIASEC structure as a key career decision construct. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 55, 146–157. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.55.2.146
Tracey, T. J. G., & Robbins, S. B. (2005). Stability of interests across ethnicity and
gender: A longitudinal examination of grades 8 through 12. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 67, 335–364. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.11.003
Tracey, T. J. G., & Robbins, S. B. (2006). The interest–major congruence and college
success relation: A longitudinal study. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69, 64–89.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2005.11.003
Tracey, T. J. G., & Rounds, J. B. (1993). Evaluating Holland’s and Gati’s vocational
interest models: A structural meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 229–246.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.113.2.229

82

Career Development and Counseling

Tracey, T. J. G., & Ward, C. C. (1998). The structure of children’s interests and competence perceptions. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45, 290–303. doi:10.1037/00220167.45.3.290
Tsabari, O., Tziner, A., & Meir, E. I. (2005). Updated meta-analysis on the relationship
between congruence and satisfaction. Journal of Career Assessment, 13, 216–232.
doi:10.1177/1069072704273165
U.S. Department of Defense. (1994). Technical manual for the ASVAB 18–19 Career
Exploration Program. Chicago, IL: United States Military Enlistment Processing
Command.
Williams, C. M. (1972). Occupational choice of male graduate students as related to
values and personality: A test of Holland’s theory. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
2, 39–46. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(72)90005-X
Yang, W., Stokes, G. S., & Hui, C. H. (2005). Cross-cultural validation of Holland’s
interest structure in Chinese population. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67, 379–396.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.08.003
Young, G., Tokar, D. M., & Subich, L. M. (1998). Congruence revisited: Do 11
indices differentially predict job satisfaction and is the relation moderated
by person and situation variables? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 52, 208–233.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.1997.1587

CHAPTER 4

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory
of Careers
PAUL J. HARTUNG

L

IFE-SPAN, LIFE-SPACE THEORY FOCUSES on the content, process, and outcomes

of career choice and development throughout the human life course
(Super, 1953, 1957, 1990; Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996). The theory
views career choice and development in three ways: (1) as movement over
time through discrete developmental stages with accompanying developmental tasks that constitute the life span, (2) as arrangement of worker and
other roles that constitute the psychosocial life space wherein people design
their lives, and (3) as implementation of self-concept in work roles. Across
the life span and within the life space, individuals, too, develop a sense of
self in contexts of time and space. In this way, life-span, life-space theory
comprises a creative synthesis of ideas and evidence culled from seemingly disparate theories and lines of research assembled along three primary
segments: the longitudinal or chronological, developmental life span; the latitudinal or contextual, psychosocial life space; and the self and self-concepts.
With development and psychosocial roles principal among its segments,
the theory describes vocational behavior as ﬂuid, dynamic, continuous, and
contextual.
Offering a segmented differential-developmental–social phenomenological perspective on vocational behavior (Super, 1994), life-span, life-space
theory also spawned a proven model and practical methods for career education and counseling (Healy, 1982; Super, 1983; Super et al., 1996). Counselors
can use this model and its methods to assist children, adolescents, and adults
with learning the attitudes, beliefs, and competencies necessary for successful career planning, exploration, decision making, and choice (Savickas, 2005,
83

84

Career Development and Counseling

2011a; Super, 1983). Today, without question, the theory ranks, along with
the theory of vocational personalities and work environments (Holland, 1997;
Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume), as one of the two most inﬂuential, empirically
supported, and widely applied career theories in the history of vocational
psychology and career development.
To fully understand the breadth and depth of vocational behavior and
career development, career practitioners can beneﬁt from knowing and
possessing ability to apply the principles and practices of life-span, life-space
theory in service of diverse client populations. Toward that end, this chapter
describes the historical background, core principles, practical applications,
and research ﬁndings in support of the theory. The chapter overviews and
updates knowledge about and use of the theory to provide both retrospective
and prospective understanding. Readers interested in further study would
do well especially to consult the original (Super, 1953, 1957), penultimate
(Super, 1990), and ﬁnal (Super, 1994; Super et al., 1996) statements of the
theory by its progenitor and prime architect: the late Professor Donald
E. Super.
BACKGROUND OF THE THEORY
Life-span, life-space theory resulted from the work of Donald E. Super (for
a biography, see Savickas, 1994). Super (1953) ﬁrst articulated a theory of
vocational development nearly 60 years ago. Name changes from the original
‘‘career development theory’’ to ‘‘developmental self-concept theory’’ and
ﬁnally to ‘‘life-span, life-space theory’’ reﬂect the theory’s evolution over
this period (Savickas, 1997). Throughout this time, Super combined in
one grand theory the fruits of existing research and his own empirical and
conceptual work in three main areas: differential psychology, developmental
psychology, and self-concept theory (for complete compendia of historical
antecedents, see Savickas, 2007; Super, 1990, 1994). These three areas form
the keystone segments of the theory.
Differential Psychology
Prior to 1950, the paradigm for comprehending vocational behavior focused
solely on the content of occupational choice from the objective perspective of
individual differences. The individual differences, or person–environment
(P-E) ﬁt perspective advanced a psychology of occupations that assumed
satisfaction and success resulted from a harmonious person–occupation
match. Near mid-20th century, this perspective found its embodiment in
a classic textbook that delineated psychological traits affecting vocational
choice and classiﬁed occupational ﬁelds and levels structuring the world of

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

85

work (Roe, 1956). By concentrating on what occupations individuals select,
the three-part matching model of self-knowledge, occupational knowledge,
and true reasoning between these two types of knowledge (Parsons, 1909)
provided counselors with an understanding of vocational choices and an
intervention scheme for ﬁtting people to jobs in accordance with their
unique interests, abilities, personalities, and other traits. This intervention
scheme relied on using psychological tests and inventories, coupled with
occupational information, to match people to jobs.
Applied to vocational behavior, differential psychology asserts that particular occupations suit particular types of people. In The Republic, Plato
(360 bc) captured this view long ago by commenting: ‘‘No two persons are
born exactly alike; but each differs from the other in natural endowments,
one being suited for one occupation and the other for another.’’ For many
years, the individual differences perspective assumed that once matched
to suitable jobs, people would experience success, satisfaction, and stability
and never again need to make a vocational choice. Today, the matching
model, best exempliﬁed in Holland’s (1997; Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume)
preeminent theory of vocational personalities and work environments, continues to inform the practice of career intervention whereby counselors help
individuals match themselves to jobs.
Advancing the matching model and reﬂecting his background as a differential psychologist, Super authored two books. In the ﬁrst volume, Super
(1942) synthesized existing knowledge about the practice of vocational guidance in the individual differences tradition and initially described his views
on career choice as a developmental process. In the second book, Super
(1949) compiled and interpreted research ﬁndings about the most prevalent
psychological tests then used in vocational guidance to teach readers how
to evaluate and use such tests themselves. Later, in life-span, life-space
theory, Super (1980) adopted differential psychology to explain the content
of occupational choice as a match between self and situation. He also used
individual differences methods to develop psychometric inventories and
scales to operationally deﬁne key constructs of the theory for use in research
and practice.
Super’s (1994) self-analysis of his more than 50-year publication record
revealed his foundation in differential psychology that anchors life-span,
life-space theory. This supported an earlier conclusion: ‘‘Super has never
repudiated the differential approach; in fact, in many ways he led it’’
(Borgen, 1991, p. 284). Notable among his many contributions to differential
career psychology, Super (1957; Zytowski, 1994), along with Lofquist and
Dawis (1978), advanced work values as traits useful in vocational appraisal
and guidance. Work values denote important satisfactions people seek
both through the nature of the work they do (i.e., intrinsic values such as

86

Career Development and Counseling

autonomy and intellectual challenge) and through the outcomes that can be
obtained from work (i.e., extrinsic values such as money and prestige). Super
developed the Work Values Inventory (Super, 1970; Zytowski, 2009) and
Values Scale (Super & Nevill, 1985b) to measure work values in counseling
and research settings (see Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15, this volume, for a
discussion of these instruments).

Developmental Psychology
By the mid-20th century, two phenomena stimulated emergence of a second
paradigm to augment the matching model for vocational guidance. Unique
to the growing profession of vocational guidance, one phenomenon involved
increasing awareness of the lack of theory to guide practice (Ginzberg, Ginsburg, Axelrad, & Herma, 1951). A second, more widespread phenomenon
concerned the shift within the United States, as well as in other countries,
from an agrarian to a predominantly industrial and organizational society
(Savickas & Baker, 2005). As individuals confronted mounting organizational work contexts, need arose to comprehend the process of occupational
choice from the subjective perspective of the developing person. Beginning
with his 1942 book, then in his 1952 presidential address to the Division of
Counseling and Guidance (American Psychological Association), and then
in his 1957 book, Super advanced a developmentally oriented psychology
of careers.
By concentrating on how individuals move through a sequence of occupations, jobs, and positions in a career, Super (1953) offered a developmental
theory of vocational behavior containing 10 propositions that increased to 14
in the theory’s later statement (Super et al., 1996). In so doing, he followed
the lead of Ginzberg and colleagues (1951), whose earlier groundbreaking
developmental theory of vocational choice ‘‘prompted an explosion of career
theories; almost one theory per year . . . for the next 20 years’’ (Savickas &
Baker, 2005, p. 42). Super’s (1942, 1949, 1957) syntheses of the existing literature, his 20-year longitudinal study of 100 ninth graders in the Career
Pattern Study (Super, 1985), and his development of psychometric scales
(e.g., Super, 1955, 1970; Super, Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers,
1979, 1988) supplied the foundational principles and constructs, mechanisms for empirical support, and applications of the theory. Primary among
its core constructs, the theory advanced the concept of career maturity (Super,
1955) as an individual’s readiness to cope with developmental career stage
tasks. Subsequent theorizing would aptly replace the biological construct
of career maturity with the psychosocial construct of career adaptability
(Savickas, 1997; Super & Knasel, 1981).

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

87

Developmental career theory and the life-span, life-space approach as its
chief exemplar augmented the individual differences perspective and matching model for vocational guidance. It did so by explaining the subjective
processes of occupational exploration, choice, entry, and adjustment among
individuals within contexts that offered mobility up organizational ladders.
The developmental view, along with social role theory, explained how individuals manage worker and other roles over the life span and propagated
the superordinate construct of career to denote ‘‘the sequence of occupations,
jobs, and positions occupied during the course of a person’s working life’’
(Super, 1963, p. 3). Whereas differential psychology focused interest on what
traits differentially ﬁt individuals for what occupations, developmental psychology placed concern on how the individual cultivates a career over time.
Holland (1959, 1997) worked to articulate what would become the prototypical P-E ﬁt theory in the differential psychology of occupations. Meanwhile,
Super (1957, 1990) explicated what would become the quintessential life span
theory in the developmental psychology of careers. As a segmental theorist
taking components from different theories, Super always remained true to
incorporating knowledge and concepts from multiple areas, including P-E
ﬁt, life span development, social learning, self-concept, and psychodynamic
perspectives (Super, 1994).
Life-span, life-space theory eventually produced practical models and
materials for assisting individuals across developmental age periods to learn
the planning attitudes, beliefs, and decision-making competencies needed
to make suitable and satisfying educational and occupational choices and to
manage their careers over the life course (Healy, 1982; Super, 1983). What may
be called the managing model of career education, then, offered counselors
a scheme for assisting people to ready themselves to make career decisions
and ﬁt work into their lives (Savickas, 2011a). The managing model and its
methods of career education and counseling supported the matching model
and its methods of vocational guidance by focusing on preparing people
to make effective occupational choices. A contemporary view on career
management as interplay between individual and organization involving
‘‘multipoint decision making in time and space’’ (Hoekstra, 2011, p. 161)
clearly reﬂects life-span, life-space theory.
Infusion of the developmental perspective via life-span, life-space theory
spread roots deep and wide, moving the ﬁeld of vocational psychology
and the profession of counseling from a solely matchmaking, vocational
guidance perspective to a managing, career development perspective. The
continuing vigor of this perspective found embodiment some years ago
in Jepsen’s (1984) assertion: ‘‘Nearly all vocational behavior theorists and
researchers seem to subscribe to some variation of the developmental viewpoint’’ (p. 178). As prime evidence, Holland (1959, 1973, 1997) attended

88

Career Development and Counseling

substantially, if incompletely (Bordin, 1959), to the role of development in
vocational behavior. Dawis (1996), too, in the theory of work adjustment
described career development as ‘‘the unfolding of capabilities and requirements in the course of a person’s interaction with environments of various
kinds (home, school, play, work) across the life span’’ (p. 94). Following
suit, many other career theories, including those described in this volume,
attend to developmental processes. Predominance of the developmental
perspective also prompted the National Vocational Guidance Association in
1985 to rename itself the National Career Development Association—a
designation that remains today (Chung, 2008). Likewise, many career
courses in graduate-level counseling and psychology programs across the
United States and in other nations include the words career development in
their titles.
Self-Concept Theory
Along with differential and developmental psychology, Super used selfconcept theory (Super, Starishevsky, Matlin, & Jordaan, 1963) as a third
keystone to frame life-span, life-space theory. Drawing from the work of
theorists such as Carl Rogers (1951), Super recognized that self-concept theory could help bind the seemingly disparate differential and developmental
perspectives on human behavior into a cohesive, more robust explanation
of vocational behavior and its development. Self-concept theory explains
how individuals develop ideas about who they are in different roles and
situations based on self-observations of their own unique personal characteristics and experiences, as well as on social interactions and feedback
from others. As Super (1963) explained, ‘‘The concept of self is generally
a picture of the self in some role, some situation, in a position, performing some set of functions, or in some web of relationships’’ (p. 18). For
example, a person organizes her conception of herself as physically muscular, agile, and fast into the role self-concept of athlete. The content and
outcomes of occupational choice, then, emerge as a function of individuals’ attempts to implement their self-concepts in work roles (Super, 1957;
Super et al., 1963).
Self-concepts refer to mental representations of self (Savickas, 2011c;
Super et al., 1996). As such, self-concepts by their very nature form individuals’ subjectively held perspectives on the self in a role. With regard to
occupational choice and work adjustment, the self per se may be viewed
from both objective and subjective perspectives. Psychometric test and
inventory data allow counselors and researchers to view the self as an
object by counting and categorizing vocational interests, abilities, and other
traits that form a personality. These traits yield an occupational (Blustein,

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

89

Devenis, & Kidney, 1989) or vocational (Savickas, 1985) identity whereby
individuals may be held up as objects to be matched to occupations that ﬁt
their particular characteristics. Objectively implementing a self-concept in
a work role involves a process akin to P-E ﬁt in the differential tradition.
By experiencing the self as an object, individuals in effect declare, ‘‘This
is me.’’
Alternatively, self-estimates of traits such as interests and abilities allow
counselors and researchers to view the self as a subject by attending to the
totality of an individual’s unique experience or personhood. The whole of an
individual’s experience forms an occupational self-concept constituting life
themes and the purpose work holds for oneself. Subjectively implementing a
self-concept in a work role involves purposefully ﬁtting work into a constellation of life roles in the developmental tradition. Experiencing self as subject,
an individual in effect states, ‘‘I shape me.’’ Combined, objective and subjective views on the self provide a lens for viewing how individuals publically
declare and privately construe the content and outcomes of their vocational
behaviors, developmental statuses, and life roles (Super et al., 1996).
Life-span, life-space theory underscores the point that individuals develop
not just one but rather constellations of self-concepts, or ideas about themselves, based on experiences in a wide array of life spheres. The primary
concern within life-span, life-space theory, of course, is the vocational sphere,
wherein the individual rests at the center of career choice, development, and
decision making. The individual as decider and constructor of perspectives
on herself or himself attempts to implement a vocational self-concept in an
occupational choice. Constructing a self-concept with regard to the work
role involves a subjective process of making meaning of the objective content of one’s lived experiences, personal characteristics, and social situation.
Then, individuals use realism and reality testing to evaluate how well their
chosen work roles incorporate their self-concepts in a continuing process of
improving the match between self and situation.
The archway of career determinants (Super, 1990), seen in Figure 4.1, delineates a unique architecture of self and self-concept development and visually
models the personal and situational factors that shape life-span, life-space
development. The two columns comprise various psychological characteristics and social forces depicted as stones within each column. In theory, these
personal and situational factors affect the life-career depicted by the arch
that sits atop the two columns. Developmental stages of childhood and adolescence form the left end of the arch. Adulthood and senescence stages form
the right end of the arch. In between rest self-concepts in roles such as child,
student, and worker with the self as decision maker. The dynamic interplay
between and among personal traits of the left-hand column and environmental factors of the right-hand column determines important vocational

Career Development and Counseling

le
Ro lfSe epts
nc
Co

SELF

Ro
S le
Co elfnce
pts

De
vel
o
Sta pmen
t
ge

ent
opm
vel
De Stage

Base

Biographical-Geographical

Society

Peer Groups
Family
School
Community

Aptitudes
Intelligence

Special Aptitudes

Values
Needs

Interests

Personality

Labor Market

Employment
Practices
Social
Policy

Achievement

The Economy

90

Base

Figure 4.1 The Archway of Career Determinants
Source: From Super, D. E. (1990). A Segmental Model of Career Development: A life-span, life-space
approach to career development. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career choice and development (2nd ed.; p. 200).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

outcomes in terms of movement through developmental stages, development of role self-concepts, and self-construction.
Super suggested that self-concept theory might be better replaced by
personal construct theory (Kelly, 1955) to account for how individuals
make occupational choices based on their own ‘‘personal assessments of
the changing socioeconomic situation and of the social structure in which
they live and function’’ (Super, 1990, p. 223). Using the language of personal constructs, Super believed, would move from self-concept theory as
‘‘essentially a matching theory’’ (p. 222) to a more social psychological conceptualization. Ultimately, self-concept theory within the life-span, life-space
approach melds the individual differences and individual development perspectives to describe self-concepts as comprising objective and subjective
self-views.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

91

Summary
By combining the three keystones of differential psychology, developmental psychology, and self-concept theory, the life-span, life-space approach
focuses:
on the differential psychology of occupations as contributory to a psychology
of careers, on life stages and processes in vocational development, on patterns
of career development, on the nature and causes of vocational maturity and
its role in choice and adjustment, and on the individual as the synthesizer of
personal data, the interpreter of experience, and the maker of decisions. (Super,
1969, p. 2)

These foundational emphases form the blueprints for conﬁguring and
comprehending the core principles of the theory.

CORE PRINCIPLES
Set against the backdrop of individual differences, individual development,
and self-concepts, life-span, life-space theory organizes its core propositions
and principles along two primary dimensions: chronological time and contextual space (for a list of the theory’s 14 propositions, see Super et al.,
1996). The life-career rainbow in Figure 4.2 depicts the theory’s two dimensions, along which a vocational self-concept is developed, implemented,
and adjusted. The theory’s longitudinal time dimension, portrayed in the
outer arcs of the rainbow, concerns the successful traversing of developmental career stages and associated tasks and transitions over the human
life span from childhood through late adulthood. The theory’s latitudinal
space dimension, portrayed in the inner arcs of the rainbow, concerns the
meaningful design of psychosocial roles within the life space, along with
the situations that individuals confront within these roles. Together, the
longitudinal and latitudinal dimensions of the theory mark the coordinates
by which individuals chart their careers over the life span and within the
life space.

Life Span: Traversing Career Stages, Tasks, and Transitions
Human life follows a deﬁnite developmental sequence from conception to
death, from womb to tomb. Every life begins at one point in time and ends
at another in a prototypical way. Yet, the unique interactions of self and situation yield substantial individual variability within this sequence. Careers,
too, begin and end in a chronological, developmental progression beginning

92

Career Development and Counseling

Situational determinants
(historical,
socioeconomic)
Maintenance
35
30
Establishment

25

20
15
Exploration

40

45

50

Homemaker
Worker
Citizen
Leisure
Student
Child

5
Life stages and ages

60
65
Disengagement
70
75

10
Growth

55

Personal determinants
(psychological,
biological)

80
Ages and life stages

Figure 4.2 The Life-Career Rainbow: Six Life Roles in Schematic Life Space
Source: The Life-Career Rainbow: Six Life Roles in Schematic Life Space in D. E. Super (1990). A lifespan, life-space approach to career development. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career Choice and Development
(2nd ed., p. 212). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Reprinted with permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

in childhood vocational aspirations and ending in late adulthood superannuation. As with general human development, each individual career proceeds
in its own unique way, following or diverting from the prototypical linear
sequence of exploration, choice, entry, adjustment, and retirement. Careers
may thus form stable, unstable, and multiple-trial patterns. The life span
segment of life-span, life-space theory deals with the linear and nonlinear
progression of careers over the life course in terms of developing, implementing, and stabilizing self-concepts in work and other roles (Super, 1990;
Super et al., 1996).
Five developmental periods demarcate the stages of a career depicted
in Figure 4.2. The childhood stage of career growth begins the cycle that
proceeds through adolescent career exploration, young adult career establishment, middle adult career maintenance (or management; see Hoekstra,
2011; Savickas, 2002), and late adult career disengagement. Each career
stage presents discernible developmental tasks (or substages) that entail
a primary adaptive goal. Developmental tasks convey socially and culturally expected responsibilities that individuals must meet with regard
to developing a career. Completing all tasks associated with each stage
builds a foundation for future success and reduces the likelihood of difﬁculties in later stages (Super et al., 1996). The ladder model of life-career
stages and tasks in Figure 4.3 depicts the prototypical sequence of career

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

Substages
75
Transition

70

93

Life stages

Retirement living
Disengagement
Retirement planning

65
Transition

60

Decelerating
Innovating

50

Updating

Maintenance

Holding

45
Transition

40
Advancing
Consolidating
30
25

11
7
4

Stabilizing
Implementing

18

Specifying
Crystallizing

Transition

Capacities

Transition

14

Establishment

Interests

Exploration

Growth

Fantasies
Curiosity
Birth

Figure 4.3 The Ladder Model of Life–Career Stages and Developmental Tasks
Source: Life Stages and Substages Based on the Typical Developmental Tasks, With Focus on the
Maxicycle. From D. E. Super (1990). A life-space, life-span approach to career development. In D. Brown
(Ed.), Career choice and development (2nd ed.; p. 214). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

development. The Adult Career Concerns Inventory (Super et al., 1988;
http://www.vocopher.com) provides counselors with a measure of exploration, establishment, maintenance, and disengagement stages and tasks.
In a prototypical linear pattern, each career stage constitutes approximate
chronological ages and characteristic tasks that combine to form a ‘‘grand
narrative’’ (Super et al., 1996, p. 135) about vocational development.
Growth. The career development grand narrative begins in childhood (Hartung, Porfeli, & Vondracek, 2005) with the life stage of growth. Spanning
birth to age 13, this opening developmental period concentrates on the goal
of forming an initial and realistic vocational self-concept, in part by identifying with signiﬁcant others. The budding vocational self-concept reﬂects
the child’s formative answer to the question ‘‘Who am I?’’ in a mental

94

Career Development and Counseling

representation of personal strengths, limitations, interests, values, abilities,
talents, and personality traits. This self-concept contains the child’s public
picture and private purpose about the future role of work in his or her life.
Society expects that opportunities and experiences afforded at home, play,
and school will arouse the child’s curiosities, fantasies, interests, and capacities to construct a future possible self to be realized in work and other social
roles. Growth substages (or developmental tasks) for children (and adults
revisiting growth) comprise developing concern about the future, control over
decision making, conviction to achieve, and competence in work habits and
attitudes (Savickas & Super, 1993). Children must learn to imagine, be selfresponsible, and problem-solve to construct a viable work future consistent
with cultural imperatives conveyed in family and community contexts. The
developmental tasks of career growth compel the child to acquire a future
orientation characterized by the ability to planfully look ahead (Savickas,
1997; Super et al., 1996). A critical element in this process is envisioning
oneself in work and other roles and comprehending the relative salience, or
importance, of these roles in one’s life.
Exploration. Childhood career growth eventually gives way to new developmental tasks associated with the ensuing life stage of exploration. Encompassing ages 14 to 24, exploration focuses the adolescent and emerging adult
(Arnett, 2004) on the goal of crystallizing, specifying, and implementing the
vocational self-concept in an occupational role. Crystallizing means developing a clear and stable vocational self-concept reﬂecting one’s preferences for
occupational ﬁelds and ability levels. Specifying educational and vocational
choices in line with the vocational self-concept results from broadly exploring preferred occupations and forming a vocational identity. Once speciﬁed, implementing an occupational choice entails preparing for and obtaining
a position. During exploration, society expects that gathering information
about self and occupations through part-time work, curricular and extracurricular experiences, and other activities will lead the adolescent and emerging
adult to ultimately select an occupation to enter and thereby implement self
in the work role. Traversing the exploration stage involves learning about
the structure and opportunities of the world of work, initially implementing a vocational self-concept, and exploring occupations broadly through
a capacity to look around (Savickas, 1997). Successful movement through
exploration yields planfulness, curiosity to explore work roles, and knowledge about career decision-making principles and the occupational world.
Establishment. Career exploration yields occupational choice, work-role
entry, and a new set of tasks in the succeeding life stage of establishment.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

95

Traversing ages 25 to 44 in a prototypical pattern, establishment involves
stabilizing, consolidating, and advancing the self-concept and a career pattern to develop a secure place in the world of work. Stabilizing involves
settling into and securing a new position by performing competently and
acclimating successfully to the work culture. This gives way to consolidating the position through sustained work productivity, interpersonal
effectiveness, and adjustment. Eventually, individuals may pursue advancing to higher-level positions when possible. Stable self-concepts and career
patterns result from successful establishment wherein the main goal concerns implementing the self-concept in the work role to yield both a
means of earning a living and a meaningful way of living a life. Work
devoid of meaning requires workers to realize their self-concepts in other
roles such as parent, spouse, community member, and leisurite. Establishment in today’s digital age of insecurity, uncertainty, and frequent
job change often proves a more variable and protracted career stage
(Savickas, 2011b).

Maintenance. Research supports renewal (Williams & Savickas, 1990) ‘‘as a
transitional period between the establishment and maintenance stages’’ characterized by ‘‘questioning future direction and goals . . . [and] encountered
primarily by younger maintainers’’ (p. 173). Successful career establishment
at midlife therefore prompts a sustainability question. Individuals ask themselves whether they want to continue in their established positions until
retirement. If not, they revisit prior tasks of exploration and establishment
to make an occupational or organizational change. If so, they continue on
with new tasks of career maintenance. Spanning ages 45 to 65, maintenance
concentrates on the prime goal of building on the vocational self-concept
developed, implemented, and stabilized in the foregoing career stages.
Because people deal in various ways with the long-term prospects of continuing in their positions, maintenance stage tasks may be better termed ‘‘styles’’
or ‘‘strategies.’’ For some people, maintenance involves a strategy of holding
on to a secured position through continued job proﬁciency. For other people,
maintenance constitutes updating knowledge and skills to enhance performance or innovating new and creative ways of performing to keep work
vigorous and fresh. Innovating in particular may prevent career plateaus
(Tan & Salomone, 1994) and mid-career changes due to job dissatisfaction.
Like establishment, career maintenance may elude many workers in the contemporary global economy because of the effects of job loss, ‘‘dejobbing’’ that
shifts work from jobs to assignments, corporate failure, and organizational
restructuring.

96

Career Development and Counseling

Disengagement. The grand narrative of life span career development concludes in late adulthood with the disengagement stage. Encompassing ages
65 and older, disengagement presents the longtime worker with a major
life transition to retirement (Shultz & Wang, 2011). This transition shifts
the focus from self-concept development, implementation, stabilization,
and enhancement in work roles to developing and implementing role selfconcepts more fully in other domains, such as family, community, and
leisure. Disengagement tasks present themselves in the form of decelerating
workloads and productivity levels, retirement planning to organize ﬁnances
and structure daily activities (Adams & Rau, 2011), and retirement living to
answer questions of where to live, what to do, and how to revitalize and form
new relationships outside the workplace. Individuals during disengagement
may ask themselves, ‘‘What will retirement mean for me?’’ or ‘‘How will I
adjust?’’
Increased life expectancies, early retirement options, and cost-of-living concerns may prompt revisiting tasks of exploration and establishment to obtain
bridge employment (Zhan, Wang, Liu, & Shultz, 2009) or develop encore
careers (Freedman, 2007). Through bridge employment, workers engage in
part-time, self-, or temporary employment after leaving full-time work to better sustain their mental and physical health, as well as their ﬁnancial solvency.
Encore careers replace retirement with engagement in alternative work that
allows greater personal meaning, fulﬁllment, or social impact than prior work
made possible. Recent theorizing has articulated eight metaphors that reﬂect
various meanings of retirement ranging from ‘‘loss,’’ characterized by purposelessness and threatened identity, to ‘‘transformation,’’ characterized by
adopting a new role, lifestyle, and identity (Sargent, Bataille, Vough, & Lee,
2011). Meanwhile, the changing nature of work and an unsettled economy
couple to alter the very nature and long-term viability of retirement itself for
many workers (Shultz & Wang, 2011).
Managing tasks, transitions, and traumas. Life stage success requires career
maturity, a term Super (1955) coined to explain and measure progress in
moving through the developmental stages and tasks particularly associated
with exploration. Career maturity denotes attitudinal and cognitive readiness to make educational and vocational choices. Attitudinal readiness means
active engagement in planning and exploring an occupational future. Cognitive readiness means possessing knowledge about occupations and how
to make good career decisions. The Career Maturity Inventory (CMI; Crites,
1965; Crites & Savickas, 1995) measures global and speciﬁc dimensions of
career maturity. Super and his colleagues (Super et al., 1979) subsequently
constructed the Career Development Inventory (for a review, see Savickas &

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

97

Hartung, 1996) to also measure level of career choice readiness more broadly
in terms of engagement in career planning and exploration, as well as knowledge about career decision making and the world of work. Counselors and
researchers may ﬁnd both measures available at http://www.vocopher.com.
Applied largely to research in and evolving from the Career Pattern
Study (Super, 1985; Super & Overstreet, 1960), career maturity proved an
apt term to denote increased choice readiness typically accompanying age
and grade-level increases during the adolescent years. Despite attempts
to apply the construct beyond the exploration stage, ‘‘the focus remained
on a structural model of career maturity in adolescence’’ (Savickas, 1997,
p. 250). Recognizing this constraint and the limitations inherent in using
a biologically based term to describe a psychosocially based process, the
theory eventually replaced career maturity with career adaptability (Savickas,
1997; Super & Knasel, 1981; Super et al., 1996). Career adaptability entails
having the readiness and resources to cope with developmental tasks, career
transitions, and work traumas across the entire life span (Savickas, 2005).
Recent research has advanced and supported career adaptability along the
three primary dimensions of planning, exploring, and deciding (e.g., Creed,
Fallon, & Hood, 2009; Hirschi, 2009; Koen, Klehe, van Vianen, Zikic, &
Nauta, 2010). The most recently revised version of the CMI produced an
adaptability form that measures the dimensions of career adaptability for
diagnostic work with school populations up to and including 12th grade
(Savickas & Porfeli, 2011).
Career adaptability aids development as individuals cycle and recycle
through the ﬁve career stages over the life span. These ﬁve career stages
collectively provide an overarching structure of career development. Individually, each stage in fact serves a principal function in that it helps to
achieve a particular purpose with regard to completing developmental tasks
associated with growing, exploring, establishing, maintaining, and disengaging from work roles. Individuals visit and revisit the tasks associated
with each function over the life course. Normative transitions such as voluntary job change and work-based traumas such as job loss prompt new
growth, reexploration, and reestablishment. Activated by personal, social, or
economic factors or a combination of these factors, transitions mark passage
from one career stage or function to the next. Movement through the stages
and tasks over chronological time constitutes the maxicycle of career development. Because people often recycle by revisiting developmental stages and
tasks through which they have passed earlier in their lives, career development also may involve various minicycles of development. For example, an
established career high school science teacher decides at midlife to transition
to a different occupational ﬁeld. Similarly, a 30-year-old veteran disengages

98

Career Development and Counseling

from military service and transitions to work in civilian life, and a 42-yearold homemaker explores options for reentering the paid workforce. Such
situations prompt new cycles of movement (i.e., recycling) through earlier
career tasks. Each developmental age period, too, presents tasks of later
career stages reﬂecting this cycling and recycling (Super & Thompson, 1981).
For example, adolescence involves the disengagement task of giving less
time to play and hobbies, and late adulthood presents the exploration task
of ﬁnding a good place to live in retirement. The life span segment of the
theory thus accounts for both linear and circuitous life-career patterns.
Life Space: Arranging Social Roles
Every life needs a context, a structure to shape its development. Life structure
comes in the form of a grand design of social roles arranged within various
domains of human activity. Performing roles of worker, spouse or partner,
volunteer, and leisurite in work, family, community, and play domains
offers an identiﬁable and potentially meaningful life structure. Too little
structure and inactivity across domains breeds ennui and various mental
health problems. For example, work-role loss causes depression, anxiety, and
lowered subjective well-being (Paul & Moser, 2009). Too much structure and
overactivity breeds exhaustion and other problems. For example, work-role
overengagement produces burnout (Maslach & Jackson, 1986) and conﬂict
with roles in other domains such as family (Halbesleben, Harvey, & Bolino,
2009). Therefore, designing a life to achieve balance among roles becomes
imperative for overall satisfaction and well-being (Niles, Herr, & Hartung,
2001). The life space segment of life-span, life-space theory deals with the
context of career development within a web of social roles individuals occupy
and enact over the life span (Super, 1990; Super et al., 1996). Depicted by the
inner arcs of the life-career rainbow (Figure 4.2), the life space constitutes
core roles individuals use to design their lives. Mindful of life’s complex and
context-rich nature, the theory thus situates career choice and development
within this constellation of social roles.
Super (1980) proposed that nine major roles constitute the typical life
structure in chronological order of child, student, leisurite, citizen, worker,
spouse, homemaker, parent, and annuitant. In the example of Figure 4.2, the
individual played six core roles over the life span. A typical life structure
comprises two or three core roles, with other roles playing a negligible or no
part (Super et al., 1996). Among these, the worker role typically represents
a core role, given the cultural, social, and personal imperative to work.
Yet, worker offers just one of several role possibilities. Rather than prizing
the work role, life-span, life-space theory uses the construct of role salience
to explain and consider the relative importance that individuals ascribe

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

99

to various roles in the course of their lives. As measured by the Salience
Inventory (Super & Nevill, 1985a; http://www.vocopher.com), role salience
entails behavioral, emotional, and values components. These components
denote how much one participates, feels invested, and expects to realize
important outcomes in a given role. Role salience thus accounts for how a
person may perform a great deal in a role (e.g., work long hours) and want
much from it (e.g., receive good pay and beneﬁts) yet not feel particularly
devoted to it (e.g., would give up the work role for a life of leisure, family,
and community activity if not for the money).
A host of factors shape levels of role salience and role viability within
the many role contexts of human development. These factors include prevailing cultural value orientations, the changing nature of work, societal
diversity, ﬂuctuating economic conditions, gender and family expectations,
social class, and occupational and other barriers (Blustein, 2006; Cook, 1994;
Fitzgerald & Betz, 1994; Hartung, 2002; Richardson, 1993). Roles, too, interact to varying degrees in ways that may be complementary and supportive
or conﬂictual and straining (Halbesleben et al., 2009). Family support may
ease job stress, whereas work overengagement may strain family life. Individuals typically seek career counseling at times of role change and when
they want to redesign their life structures into a different pattern of life
roles (Super et al., 1996). Counselors, in response, must ﬁrst recognize and
address the relative importance that clients ascribe to various life roles,
rather than assuming that the work role constitutes the main focus of the
client’s problems and concerns. Recent theorizing has elaborated on life roles
as vehicles for developing a personal career identity and public career success
(Hoekstra, 2011).
Self-Concepts: Developing, Implementing, and Adjusting Self
Across the life span and through the life space, individuals develop, implement, and adjust their self-concepts to optimally ﬁt themselves to social roles
(Super, 1951). The twin processes of traversing career stages and arranging
social roles engage the individual in developing a vocational self-concept,
applying it to the work role, and regulating it according to changes in self
and circumstances. Self-concepts develop from a combination of heredity,
social learning experiences, opportunities, and evaluations by self and others.
The vocational self-concept reﬂects both personal (e.g., needs, values, and
interests) and situational (e.g., economy, society, and labor market) factors.
Occupational choice entails implementing a self-concept, work expresses the
fullness of self, and career development encompasses a ‘‘continuing process
of improving the match between self and situations’’ (Super et al., 1996,
p. 139).

100

Career Development and Counseling

As we have seen, developing a vocational self-concept represents the
primary adaptive goal or function of career growth for children and for adults
recycling through this stage. Then, in exploration, the adolescent or adult
recycler tries implementing the self in work roles. During establishment, the
young or recycling adult who has implemented a vocational self-concept in a
work role seeks to stabilize the self in a chosen occupation. As an established
career progresses to maintenance, changes in self and circumstance prompt
adjusting the work-role self-concept accordingly during middle adulthood.
Reaching career disengagement, the adult in early retirement or late life
relinquishes the work role and devotes energies to more fully developing,
implementing, and adjusting self-concepts in other life roles.
Three of life-span, life-space theory’s 14 propositions (see Super et al.
1996) deal directly with occupational choice as a function of self-concept.
First, the theory proposes that self-concept development, implementation,
and adjustment entail a lifelong process of decisions and redecisions. Selfconcepts grow increasingly stable over the life span, lending coherence and
continuity to one’s life. Yet, they remain susceptible to change with time and
experience. Second, the theory postulates that career development involves
processes of developing and implementing occupational self-concepts. This
occurs as the individual synthesizes and negotiates knowledge about self
and experience to form more satisfying person–environment connections.
Third, the theory suggests that individuals experience subjective success
and satisfaction in work as a function of their ability to implement their
vocational self-concepts in their occupational choices. Individuals more able
to enact their self-concepts in work roles presumably experience greater
fulﬁllment.
As the segment joining life span and life space, self-concept links person
as decider to environment as decision. Recent work has delineated with
remarkable acuity three perspectives on the self and self-concepts (Phillips,
2011; Savickas, 2011c). Individually, Phillips and Savickas each described
the self in three unique terms. Phillips delineated self and self-concept as a
collection of traits, as developing over time, and as decision maker. Meanwhile, Savickas portrayed the self as object in the form of personality, as
subject in the form of personhood, and as project in the form of identity.
Collectively, the conceptual works of Phillips and Savickas converge on the
position advanced by and amenable to life-span, life-space theory that the
self and self-concepts comprise differential, developmental, and constructionist dimensions (for more about constructionism and views on the self, see
Savickas, 2011a, 2011c, Chapter 6 in this volume). The differential dimension
reﬂects the view that objective knowledge about the content of self and vocational self-concept (i.e., personality traits or characteristics), combined with
knowledge about occupations, promotes effective career decision making.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

101

In the differential view, the self passively matches to occupations that it most
resembles, comparable to an actor assigned to perform in a work role. The
developmental dimension reﬂects the view that subjective reﬂection yields
meaning (i.e., personhood) as the self and self-concepts surface, develop,
and change over time. In the developmental view, the self actively develops through work roles, much like an agent who manages a career. The
constructionist dimension, building on the differential and developmental
perspectives, reﬂects the view that projective self-construction involves purposefully using work and career to design and shape experience. In the
constructionist view, the self with even greater agency intentionally decides
about and scripts the work role, akin to an author who writes a life-career
story. The constructionist view on the self goes beyond matching and developing to also emphasize that the individual purposefully reﬂects on, shapes,
and makes meaning of vocational choices and development.
In sum, life-span, life-space theory long sought to combine these three
perspectives on self (i.e., differential, developmental, and constructionist) in
one grand statement about career choice and development. Super harvested
the fruits of P-E ﬁt and life span career psychology, along with social
role theory, to articulate the fundamental tenets of life-span, life-space
theory. He also attended, albeit less deliberately and directly, to the roles
of personal constructs (i.e., internal models of reality or beliefs people
form about themselves and the world; Kelly, 1955) and narratives in career
development and counseling. For example, he alluded to the merits of using
personal constructs rather than self-concepts to connect the life span and life
space segments. Super also articulated the thematic extrapolation method
(Jepsen, 1994; Super, 1954) as a narrative career counseling intervention for
ascertaining life themes to promote career choice and development. The
Career Pattern Study collected life history data to capture the rich context
and stories of a life-career. Ultimately, Super’s passing in 1994 left to other
theorists the goals of fully reconciling and synthesizing the differential,
developmental, and narrative (or constructionist) dimensions of life-span,
life-space theory. Savickas (2002, 2005, Chapter 6 in this volume) attempts
this very synthesis in career construction theory.
EMPIRICAL SUPPORT
As the life-span, life-space approach has ranked among the dominant theories of career choice and development for over 60 years, so, too, has it
prompted a wealth of empirical research about its propositions and principles. Leading the way, Super and his robust cadre of associates and
students conducted sustained programmatic research during this period,
most notably in the Career Pattern Study (Super, 1985; Super & Overstreet,

102

Career Development and Counseling

1960) and multinational work importance study (Super & Sverko, 1995).
These efforts produced substantial evidence in support of many of the theory’s concepts (for detailed reviews, see Betz, 2008; Borgen, 1991; Hackett,
Lent, & Greenhaus, 1991; Hartung et al., 2005; Jepsen, 1984; Osipow &
Fitzgerald, 1996). For example, results of the Career Pattern Study indicated
general support for career maturity as a predictor of important outcomes
such as career satisfaction, self-improvement, and occupational satisfaction.
Findings also indicated that age-graded increases in career maturity occur
as children and adolescents become more future-oriented, more actively
engaged in exploring careers, and more knowledgeable about occupations
and making career decisions. A comprehensive review of the child vocational development literature indicated signiﬁcant progress in completing
developmental tasks consistent with the career stages of growth and exploration (Hartung et al., 2005). Results of the work importance study (Super &
Sverko, 1995) indicated support for the validity of constructs of work values
and life-role salience across 12 nations. A review of the work importance
study literature concluded that contextual factors such as developmental
stage, gender, and culture affect role salience and work values (Niles &
Goodnough, 1996). It also pointed out the counseling utility of these two
concepts central to life-span, life-space theory.
A multitude of individual studies have also examined and provided at
least reasonable support for aspects of the theory. Review and advancement
of much of this work, as well as cross-cultural support, appears in a special
issue of the Career Development Quarterly (Savickas, 1994). This special issue
deals with the theory’s key constructs, such as career development and
maturity, exploration, adaptability, life roles, and work values. The research
reviewed pertains to elements across the theory’s three primary segments of
life span, life space, and self-concepts. On balance, the special issue authors
concluded that research generally supports these theoretical constructs and
would beneﬁt from use of more reﬁned methodologies and inclusion of
more diverse participant samples. Elsewhere, research has indicated that
future orientation and planfulness promote career maturity and academic
success (Lewis, Savickas, & Jones, 1996). A more recent study supported the
proposed planning, exploration, and decision-making components of career
adaptability (Creed et al., 2009).
Research has also supported the validity and reliability of the wide array of
psychometric instruments that operationally deﬁne various concepts within
life-span, life-space theory. For example, study ﬁndings strongly support
the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the Career Development Inventory as a
measure of readiness to make educational and vocational choices and as
an operational deﬁnition of Super’s structural model of adolescent career
maturity (Savickas & Hartung, 1996). Likewise, the Adult Career Concerns

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

103

Inventory provides a valid and reliable measure of attitudes about (Cairo,
Kritis, & Myers, 1996) and progress toward completing (Niles, Lewis, &
Hartung, 1997) developmental career stages and tasks during the adult
years. Research also supports the Values Scale (Nevill & Kruse, 1996) and the
Salience Inventory (Nevill & Calvert, 1996) as valid and reliable measures of
work values and life-role salience, respectively (see Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15,
this volume, for a discussion of these two inventories).
More broadly speaking, ‘‘the developmental segment is well documented,
and data relative to the self-concept segment generally agree with the theory’’ (Super et al., 1996, p. 145). Literature reviews have both supported
and advanced self-concept as important in career development and career
intervention (Betz, 1994; Osipow, 1983). A review by Osipow and Fitzgerald
(1996) concluded that the theory has substantial research and practice utility,
as well as broad empirical support. A wealth of research speciﬁcally supports
the roles of career maturity and exploratory behavior in promoting career
choice and development (Hartung et al., 2005; Savickas & Hartung, 1996). A
criticism of this and much research related to the theory has been an almost
exclusive focus on the adolescent and young adult years, with little attention
to childhood and middle and late adulthood. Hartung and colleagues (2005),
however, reviewed a substantial body of literature supporting Super’s views
of the career development processes during the childhood and early adolescent years consistent with life-span, life-space theory. Beyond growth
and early exploration stages, support of family, teachers, and friends fosters
success in completing career exploration stage tasks, but later career stages
of establishment, maintenance, and disengagement reﬂect more nonlinear
processes in line with the life-span, life-space concept of recycling (see Betz,
2008). Critics have also pointed to inadequate consideration of factors such
as gender and cultural context as a problem with the theory. In response,
research has supported the cross-cultural validity of the career maturity
construct (e.g., Leong & Seraﬁca, 2001), and ﬁndings of the Work Importance
Study indicated cross-national support for the constructs of life roles and
work values (Super & Sverko, 1995). Conceptual work has also underscored
the cultural dimensions and utility of the life roles and values constructs
(Hartung, 2002).
Theory revision to include the life space and self-concept segments has
also well attended to issues of gender, with particular focus on achieving
balance among multiple life roles, especially for women. The theory’s lack of
testable hypotheses and its use as a post hoc way to interpret ﬁndings rather
than an a priori frame for study design (Hackett et al., 1991) have limited
true tests of its propositions. Despite a noted contemporary decline in its
empirical study, the theory’s tremendous breadth has for decades allowed
researchers to apply it to considering, comprehending, and consolidating

104

Career Development and Counseling

evidence about the vast complexity of vocational behavior and development
in diverse contexts.
APPLICATION TO CAREER INTERVENTION
Reﬂecting the dictum ‘‘there is nothing so practical as a good theory’’
(Lewin, 1952, p. 169), the life-span, life-space approach offers a useful guide
for career intervention. During 60 years of theory development, Super and
his colleagues simultaneously devised methods and materials for assisting
individuals to prepare for, enter, and adjust to work roles over the life span.
This culminated in a model known as career-development assessment and
counseling (C-DAC; Super, 1983). C-DAC systematically applies life-span,
life-space theory’s key components (i.e., the archway of career determinants,
the life career rainbow, and the ladder model of career stages and tasks) to
career intervention practice by blending elements of the differential, developmental, and self-concept segments of the theory into one comprehensive
four-step scheme. The model’s differential component reﬂects Parsons’s
(1909) matching model and Holland’s (1997) person–environment ﬁt theory. The model’s developmental component directly reﬂects Super’s (1990)
life-span, life-space theory that recognizes the stages and roles that constitute a life career. The model’s self-concept or personal construct component
reﬂects the preferred use of a narrative approach in transitioning from career
assessment to career counseling (Super et al., 1992).
Assessment Battery
Using a comprehensive career assessment battery, the C-DAC approach
helps clients explore their life roles, developmental stages and tasks, career
attitudes and knowledge, values, and interests within their unique life
contexts. The C-DAC model offers counselors ﬂexibility in using various
measures in career assessment. A typical C-DAC battery includes the following four core measures to assess (1) role salience, (2) developmental concerns,
(3) career maturity, and (4) work values and interests.
Role salience is typically assessed with Super and Nevill’s (1985a; http://
www.vocopher.com) Salience Inventory (SI). The SI measures the extent to
which individuals participate in, commit to, and expect to realize values in
ﬁve life roles: student, worker, citizen, homemaker (including spouse and
parent), and leisurite.
The Adult Career Concerns Inventory (ACCI; Super et al., 1988; http://
www.vocopher.com) assesses developmental concerns and attitudes.
The ACCI’s 4 scales and 12 subscales measure concerns related to
the career stages and developmental tasks, respectively, of exploration

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

105

(crystallizing, specifying, implementing), establishment (stabilizing, consolidating, advancing), maintenance (holding, updating, innovating), and
disengagement (decelerating, retirement planning, retirement living). The
ACCI can be used to measure developmental task mastery, as well as level
of concern with developmental tasks (Niles et al., 1997).
Career maturity is usually assessed with the Career Development Inventory (CDI; Super et al., 1979; http://www.vocopher.com). The CDI measures
readiness for making educational and vocational choices. The CDI has two
parts: career orientation, with four scales that measure career planning (CP),
career exploration (CE), career decision making (DM), and world-of-work
information (WW); and knowledge of preferred occupation, with one scale
measuring knowledge of preferred occupational group (PO). Three composite scores result from summing individual scale scores as follows: career
development attitudes combines CP and CE; career development knowledge
and skills combines DM and WW; and career orientation total combines CDA
and CDK. Higher scores indicate greater career maturity.
The Values Scale (VS; Super & Nevill, 1985b; see Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15,
this volume) is typically used to measure 21 basic intrinsic and extrinsic
values people seek in work and life. A typical C-DAC assessment battery
concludes with the Strong Interest Inventory (see Hansen, Chapter 14, this
volume) to assess vocational interests.
Intervention Process
Counselors implement the C-DAC model in a four-step process of preview,
depth view, data assessment, and counseling. This process begins with a
preview that reviews any available data (e.g., school and prior counseling
records), an initial interview to identify the client’s presenting concerns,
and the formation of a preliminary intervention plan. Central to this ﬁrst
step, the practitioner assesses work importance relative to the importance
of life roles in other theaters, such as school, home and family, community,
and leisure. This assessment may be done informally through dialogue and
formally using the Salience Inventory. Ascertaining level of role salience
indicates how individuals wish to arrange their life roles. Individuals high in
work-role salience show readiness to maximally beneﬁt from further career
intervention. Those individuals low in work-role salience may need help
with either orienting to the worker role and its importance as a central life
task or with exploring and preparing for other life roles.
C-DAC’s next step is a depth view that systematically measures career
stage using the ACCI and career development level using the CDI. This
process indicates how ready the individual is for career decision-making
activities, such as identifying and exploring occupational interests and work

106

Career Development and Counseling

values. Individuals low in career choice readiness need interventions to
increase planfulness, exploratory behavior, and knowledge about decision
making and the structure of work and occupations. Assessing readiness before
assessing traits such as interests to match people to occupations is critical
because, as Super (1983) stated, ‘‘Match-making is hardly likely to last unless
those being matched are ready and willing’’ (p. 557). Once a client is ready
for career decision making, attention turns to data assessment, measuring
vocational interests, abilities, and values using appropriate inventories and
scales. In a typical C-DAC battery, these instruments include the SII (Donnay
et al., 2005) and the VS (Super & Nevill, 1985b).
C-DAC concludes in a fourth step of counseling that involves interpreting
all of the assessment data to yield an integrated picture of the individual
and a plan for action. An elaboration of the C-DAC model suggested also
appraising cultural identity in the ﬁrst step and considering cultural identity
concerns throughout the process (Hartung et al., 1998). Interested readers
may wish to study the original (Super, 1983) and subsequent descriptions
and illustrations of the C-DAC approach (e.g., Hartung, 1998; Hartung et al.,
1998; Niles & Usher, 1993; Osborne, Brown, Niles, & Miner, 1997; Taber
& Hartung, 2002). Ultimately, C-DAC helps guide practitioners in teaching
children, adolescents, and adults the planning attitudes, career beliefs, and
decision-making competencies necessary for life-career success (Savickas,
2005, 2011a). The approach also assists individuals with completing developmental tasks and clarifying and implementing their self-concepts. As a
comprehensive scheme for linking people to occupations that ﬁt with their
self-concepts and within the broader arrangement of their life roles, C-DAC
offers a useful guide and method for career intervention.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Despite having now passed the zenith of its own conceptual and empirical
advancement, life-span, life-space theory remains ‘‘a sophisticated framework for comprehending the full complexity of vocational behavior and
its development in diverse groups in manifold settings’’ (Super et al.,
1996, p. 170). As evidence of its preeminent inﬂuence, concepts underlying
life-span, life-space theory pervade much theoretical and applied work evidenced in many of the chapters of this volume and in other works (e.g.,
Blustein, 2006; Brown, 2002; Gottfredson, 2002; Guichard, 2005; Hoekstra,
2011; Vondracek, Lerner, & Schulenberg, 1986). Most notably, readers will
ﬁnd the central tenets, propositions, and practical materials of the life-span,
life-space approach directly and substantially updated and advanced in the
theory and practice of career construction (Savickas, 2002, 2005, Chapter 6,

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

107

this volume), as well as in resources available free in an Internet-based career
development and counseling resource, referred to as a career ‘‘collaboratory’’
(see Glavin & Savickas, 2010; http://www.vocopher.com). Such conceptual
and practical advancement well beﬁts the spirit of life-span, life-space theory
as a ﬂuid, contextual, and multidimensional approach to understanding
and developing careers that remains open to continued renovation and
reﬁnement.
Life-span, life-space theory leaves practitioners with a useful guide and
tools for practice. As a guide for practice, the theory reminds practitioners
that career choice and development encompasses a lifelong, developmental process that begins in childhood and proceeds continuously over the
life course. Each life stage presents particular problems to solve, and these
problems may, and often do, surface and resurface in predictable and unpredictable ways at various age periods. By attending to the developmental
nature of careers, counselors can assist clients to understand and deal with
current and imminent developmental tasks to promote effective career planning, career exploration, career decision making, and work adjustment at
all life stages. Practitioners can help clients ready themselves for designing
their careers and navigating successfully through both anticipated transitions, such as from school to work, job to job, and work to retirement, and
unanticipated work-based traumas, such as job loss, work disability, and job
dissatisfaction.
Applying a developmental perspective on careers to career education and
counseling practice, the theory also reminds practitioners to help clients
arrange their work and other life roles into a livable and satisfying pattern. Recognizing that worker represents one of many psychosocial roles
that people play helps counselors more effectively understand, assess, and
intervene with clients relative to the multiple roles that form the basis of
the life structure. Greater cultural relevance in practice can be achieved
by exploring the unique meanings clients ascribe to life roles and helping
them comprehend how society and their cultural backgrounds shape those
meanings. By attending to the collection of traits that individuals possess, as
well as the meaning and purpose those traits hold for the work role, counselors can help clients clarify and shape their self-concepts. With greater
self-concept clarity, clients may experience an improved match between self
and occupation, as well as a more purposeful implementation of self in work
and other life roles. Life-span, life-space theory informed the development
of many career assessment instruments. These measures, combined with
the language for understanding career development that the theory offers,
provide useful tools for fostering careers across the life span and through the
life space.

108

Career Development and Counseling

REFERENCES
Adams, G. A., & Rau, B. L. (2011). Putting off tomorrow to do what you want today:
Planning for retirement. American Psychologist, 66, 180–192.
Arnett, J. (2004). Emerging adulthood: The winding road from the late teens through the
twenties. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Betz, N. E. (1994). Self-concept theory in career development and counseling. Career
Development Quarterly, 43, 32–42.
Betz, N. E. (2008). Advances in vocational theories. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 357–374). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L., Devenis, L., & Kidney, B. (1989). Relationship between the identity
formation process and career development. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36,
196–202.
Bordin, E. S. (1959). Comment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 6, 44–45.
Borgen, F. H. (1991). Megatrends and milestones in vocational behavior: A
20-year counseling psychology retrospective. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 39,
263–290.
Brown, D. (2002). The role of work values and cultural values in occupational choice,
satisfaction, and success. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career choice and development (4th ed.,
pp. 465–509). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cairo, P. C., Kritis, K. J., & Myers, R. M. (1996). Career assessment and the Adult
Career Concerns inventory. Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 189–204.
Chung, Y. B. (2008). National Career Development Association. In F. T. L. Leong
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of counseling, Vol. 4, Career counseling (pp. 1582–1583). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cook, E. P. (1994). Role salience and multiple roles: A gender perspective. Career
Development Quarterly, 43, 85–95.
Creed, P. A., Fallon, T., & Hood, M. (2009). The relationship between career
adaptability, person and situation variables, and career concerns in young adults.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 219–229.
Crites, J. O. (1965). Measurement of vocational maturity in adolescence. Psychological
Monographs, 79 (Whole No. 595).
Crites, J. O., & Savickas, M. L. (1995). Revision of the Career Maturity Inventory.
Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 131–138.
Dawis, R. V. (1996). The theory of work adjustment and person–environment
correspondence counseling. In D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and
development: Applying contemporary theories to practice (3rd ed., pp. 75–120). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Donnay, D. A. C., Morris, M. L., Schaubhut, N. A., & Thompson, R. C. (2005). Strong
Interest Inventory manual: Research, development, and strategies for interpretation.
Mountain View, CA: CPP Inc.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

109

Fitzgerald, L. F., & Betz, N. E. (1994). Career development in cultural context: The
role of gender, race, class, and sexual orientation. In M. L. Savickas & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Convergence in career development theories: Implications for science and practice
(pp. 103–117). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Freedman, M. (2007). Encore: Finding work that matters in the second half of life. New
York, NY: Public Affairs.
Ginzberg, E., Ginsburg, S., Axelrad, S., & Herma, J. (1951). Occupational choice: An
approach to a general theory. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Glavin, K. W., & Savickas, M. L. (2010). Vocopher: The career collaboratory. Journal
of Career Assessment, 18, 345–354.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2002). Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription, compromise, and
self-creation. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career choice and development (4th ed., pp. 85–148).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Guichard, J. (2005). Life-long self-construction. International Journal for Educational
and Vocational Guidance, 5, 111–124.
Hackett, G., Lent, R. W., & Greenhaus, J. H. (1991). Advances in vocational theory
and research: A 20-year retrospective. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 38, 3–38.
Halbesleben, J. R. B., Harvey, J., & Bolino, M. C. (2009). Too engaged? A conservation
of resources view of the relationship between work engagement and work
interference with family. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 1452–1465.
Hartung, P. J. (1998). Assessing Ellenore Flood’s roles and values to focus her career
shopping. Career Development Quarterly, 46, 360–366.
Hartung, P. J. (2002). Cultural context in career theory and practice: Role salience
and values. Career Development Quarterly, 51, 12–25.
Hartung, P. J., Porfeli, E. J., & Vondracek, F. W. (2005). Child vocational development:
A review and reconsideration. Journal of Vocational Behavor,66, 385–419.
Hartung, P. J., Vandiver, B. J., Leong, F. T. L., Pope, M., Niles, S. G., & Farrow,
B. (1998). Appraising cultural identity in career-development assessment and
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 46, 276–293.
Healy, C. C. (1982). Career development: Counseling through the life stages. Boston, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.
Hirschi, A. (2009). Career adaptability development in adolescence: Multiple predictors and effect on sense of power and life satisfaction. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
74, 145–155.
Hoekstra, H. (2011). A career roles model of career development. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 78, 159–173.
Holland, J. L. (1959). A theory of vocational choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
6, 35–45.
Holland, J. L. (1973). Making vocational choices. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources.
Jepsen, D. A. (1984). The developmental perspective on vocational behavior: A
review of theory and research. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of
counseling psychology (pp. 178–215). New York, NY: Wiley.

110

Career Development and Counseling

Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New York, NY: Norton.
Koen, J., Klehe, U. C., Van Vianen, A. E. M., Zikic, J., & Nauta, A. (2010). Job-search
strategies and reemployment quality: The impact of career adaptability. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 77, 126–139.
Leong, F. T. L., & Seraﬁca, F. C. (1995). Career development of Asian Americans: A
research area in need of a good theory. In F. T. L. Leong (Ed.), Career development
and vocational of racial and ethnic minorities (pp. 67–102). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewin, K. (1952). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers by Kurt Lewin.
London, UK: Tavistock.
Lewis, D. M., Savickas, M. L., & Jones, B. J. (1996). Career development predicts
medical school success. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49, 86–98.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1978). Values as second-order needs in the theory of
work adjustment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 12, 12–19.
Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1986). Maslach Burnout Inventory manual (2nd ed.). Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Nevill, D. D., & Calvert, P. D. (1996). Career assessment and the Salience Inventory.
Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 399–412.
Nevill, D. D., & Kruse, S. J. (1996). Career assessment and the Values Scale. Journal
of Career Assessment, 4, 383–397.
Niles, S. G., & Goodnough, G. E. (1996). Life-role salience and values: A review of
recent research. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 65–86.
Niles, S. G., Herr, E. L., & Hartung, P. J. (2001). Achieving life balance: Myths, realities,
and developmental perspectives. Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse on Adult,
Career, and Vocational Education.
Niles, S. G., Lewis, D. M., & Hartung, P. J. (1997). Using the Adult Career Concerns Inventory to measure task involvement. Career Development Quarterly, 46,
87–97.
Niles, S. G., & Usher, C. H. (1993). Applying the career-development assessment and
counseling model to the case of Rosie. Career Development Quarterly, 42, 61–65.
Osborne, W. L., Brown, S., Niles, S., & Miner, C. U. (1997). Career development
assessment and counseling: Applications of the Donald E. Super C-DAC approach.
Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Osipow, S. H. (1983). Theories of career development (3rd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Osipow, S. H., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1996). Theories of career development (4th ed.).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing a vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Paul, K. I., & Moser, K. (2009). Unemployment impairs mental health: Meta-analyses.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 264–282.
Phillips, S. D. (2011). Implementing self-concept: Matching, developing, and deciding. In P. J. Hartung & L. M. Subich (Eds.), Developing self in work and career:
Concepts, cases, and contexts (pp. 161–173). Washington, DC: APA.
Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives: A location for counseling psychologists. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 425–433.
Roe, A. (1956). The psychology of occupations. New York, NY: Wiley.
Rogers, C. R. Client-centered therapy. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifﬂin.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

111

Sargent, L. D., Bataille, C. D., Vough, H. C., & Lee, M. D. (2011). Metaphors
for retirement: Unshackled from schedules. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79,
315–324.
Savickas, M. L. (1985). Identity in vocational development. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 27, 329–337.
Savickas, M. L. (1994). Donald Edwin Super: The career of a planful explorer. Career
Development Quarterly, 43, 4–24.
Savickas, M. L. (1997). Career adaptability: An integrative construct for life-span,
life-space theory. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 247–259.
Savickas, M. L. (2002). Career construction: A developmental theory of vocational
behavior. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career choice and development (4th ed., pp. 149–205).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Savickas, M. L. (2005). The theory and practice of career construction. In S. Brown &
R. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work
(pp. 42–70). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Savickas, M. L. (2007). Super, Donald Edwin. In F. T. L. Leong (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
counseling, Vol. 4, Career counseling (pp. 1645–1647). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Savickas, M. L. (2011a). Career counseling. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Savickas, M. L. (2011b). New questions for vocational psychology: Premises,
paradigms, and practices. Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 251–258.
Savickas, M. L. (2011c). The self in vocational psychology: Object, subject, and
project. In P. J. Hartung & L. M. Subich (Eds.), Developing self in work and career:
Concepts, cases, and contexts (pp. 17–33). Washington, DC: APA.
Savickas, M. L., & Baker, D. B. (2005). The history of vocational psychology:
Antecedents, origins, and early development. In W. B. Walsh & M. L. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (3rd ed., pp. 15–50). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Savickas, M. L., & Hartung, P. J. (1996). The Career Development Inventory in review:
Psychometric and research ﬁndings. Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 171–188.
Savickas, M. L., & Porfeli, E. J. (2011). Revision of the Career Maturity Inventory: The
adaptability form. Journal of Career Assessment, doi:10.1177/1069072711409342.
Savickas, M. L., & Super, D. E. (1993). Can life stages and substages be identiﬁed in
students? Man and Work: Journal of Labor Studies, 4, 71–78.
Shultz, K. S., & Wang, M. (2011). Psychological perspectives on the changing nature
of retirement. American Psychologist, 66, 170–179.
Super, D. E. (1942). The dynamics of vocational adjustment. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Super, D. E. (1949). Appraising vocational ﬁtness by means of psychological tests. New
York, NY: HarperCollins.
Super, D. E. (1951). Vocational adjustment: Implementing a self-concept. Occupations,
30, 88–92.
Super, D. E. (1953). A theory of vocational development. American Psychologist, 8,
185–190.
Super, D. E. (1954). Career patterns as a basis for vocational counseling. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 1, 12–20.

112

Career Development and Counseling

Super, D. E. (1955). The dimensions and measurement of vocational maturity.
Teachers College Record, 57, 151–163.
Super, D. E. (1957). The psychology of careers. New York, NY: Harper and Row.
Super, D. E. (1963). Toward making self-concept theory operational. In D. E. Super,
R. Starishevsky, N. Matlin, & J. P. Jordaan (Eds.), Career development: Self-concept
theory (pp. 17–32). New York, NY: College Entrance Examination Board.
Super, D. E. (1969). Vocational development theory: Persons, positions, and processes. Counseling Psychologist, 1, 2–30.
Super, D. E. (1970). Manual for the Work Values Inventory. New York, NY: Houghton
Mifﬂin.
Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 16, 282–298.
Super, D. E. (1983). Assessment in career guidance: Toward truly developmental
counseling. Personnel and Guidance Journal, 61, 555–562.
Super, D. E. (1985). Coming of age in Middletown: Careers in the making. American
Psychologist, 40, 405–414.
Super, D. E. (1990). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. In
D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development: Applying contemporary
theories to practice (2nd ed., pp. 197–261). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Super, D. E. (1994). A life-span, life-space perspective on convergence. In M. L.
Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in theories of career choice and development: Implications for science and practice (pp. 63–74). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Super, D. E., & Knasel, E. G. (1981). Career development in adulthood:
Some theoretical problems. British Journal of Guidance and Counseling, 9,
194–201.
Super, D. E., & Nevill, D. D. (1985a). Salience Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Super, D. E., & Nevill, D. D. (1985b). Values Scale. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Super, D. E., Osborne, L., Walsh, D., Brown, S., & Niles, S. G. (1992). Developmental
career assessment in counseling: The C-DAC Model. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 71, 74–80.
Super, D. E., & Overstreet, P. L. (1960). The vocational maturity of ninth-grade boys.
New York, NY: Teachers College Press, Columbia University.
Super D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space
approach to careers. In D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development:
Applying contemporary theories to practice (3rd ed., pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Super, D. E., Starishevsky, R., Matlin, N. & Jordaan, J. P. (1963). Career development:
Self-concept theory. New York, NY: College Entrance Examination Board.
Super, D. E., & Sverko, B. (Eds.). (1995). Life roles, values, and careers: International
ﬁndings of the work importance study. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Super, D. E., & Thompson, A. S. (1981). The Adult Career Concerns Inventory. New
York, NY: Teachers College, Columbia University.

The Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers

113

Super, D. E., Thompson, A. S., Lindeman, R. H., Jordaan, J. P., & Myers, R. A. (1979).
Career Development Inventory: School form. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Super, D. E., Thompson, A. S., Lindeman, R. H., Jordaan, J. P., & Myers, R. A. (1988).
Adult Career Concerns Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Taber, B., & Hartung, P. J. (2002). Developmental career assessment and counseling
with a multipotentialed client. In S. G. Niles, J. Goodman, & M. Pope (Eds.), The
career counseling casebook: A resource for students, practitioners, and counselor educators
(pp. 171–175). Tulsa, OK: National Career Development Association.
Tan, C. S., & Salomone, P. R. (1994). Understanding career plateauing: Implications
for counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 42, 291–301.
Vondracek, F. W., Lerner, R. M., & Schulenberg, J. E. (1986). Career development: A
life-span developmental approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Williams, C., & Savickas, M. L. (1990). Developmental tasks of career maintenance.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 36, 166–175.
Zhan, Y., Wang, M., Liu, S., & Shultz, K. S. (2009). Bridge employment and retirees’
health: A longitudinal investigation. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 14,
374–389.
Zytowski, D. G. (1994). A Super contribution to vocational theory: Work values.
Career Development Quarterly, 43, 25–31.
Zytowski, D. (2009). Super’s Work Values Inventory–revised: Technical manual
(Version 1.2). Ames, IA: Kuder http://www.kuder.com/downloads/SWV-Tech
-Manual.pdf

CHAPTER 5

Social Cognitive Career Theory
ROBERT W. LENT

P

EOPLE’S WORK POSSIBILITIES AND developmental trajectories are affected by

many variables, including their personal attributes (e.g., interests,
abilities, values), learning and socialization experiences, and the
resources, opportunities, and barriers afforded by their environments. Occupational paths are forged not by any one of these forces, but rather by the
complex interactions among them. The process of career development plays
out over multiple life periods, such as preparation for work (education and
training), work entry, adjustment to work, and disengagement from work.
Career theories provide systems for explaining how many factors operate
together to determine occupational choice and development over the life
course. In particular, we rely on theories to assemble the many parts of
career development into a plausible whole, to organize existing research and
generate new knowledge about how people live their work lives, and to
spawn practical methods to promote optimal career-life outcomes.
Social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent & Brown, 2006, 2008; Lent,
Brown, & Hackett, 1994, 2000) is a relatively recent approach to understanding educational and occupational behavior. It brings together common
elements identiﬁed by earlier career theorists—especially Super, Holland,
Krumboltz, and Lofquist and Dawis—and seeks to create a unifying framework for explaining how people (a) develop vocational interests, (b) make
occupational choices, (c) achieve varying levels of career success and stability, and (d) experience satisfaction or well-being in the work environment.
An SCCT model of the career self-management process is also under development (Lent & Brown, 2012). This chapter contains three main sections:
(a) an overview of SCCT’s basic elements and predictions; (b) a brief summary of the theory’s research base, including study of diverse populations
115

116

Career Development and Counseling

(e.g., people of color, women, persons with disabilities, gay and lesbian
workers); and (c) consideration of developmental and counseling applications for maximizing career options, fostering career choice making, and
promoting work success and satisfaction. More comprehensive presentations of SCCT, its research base, conceptual underpinnings, relations to
other career theories, practical implications, and applications to particular
populations can be found in other sources (e.g., Betz, 2008; Brown & Lent,
1996; Fabian, 2000; Hackett & Byars, 1996; Lent & Brown, 2006, 2008; Lent
et al., 1994, 2000; Lent & Hackett, 1994; Morrow, Gore, & Campbell, 1996).
OVERVIEW OF SCCT
This section begins by considering SCCT’s connections to other theories of
career development. It then introduces SCCT’s basic elements and models.
Similarities and Differences With Other Career Theories
Trait–factor (later known as P-E ﬁt) career models, such as Holland’s theory
(Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume), tend to view people and work environments
in trait-oriented terms, emphasizing variables that are relatively global, constant, and enduring across time and situations. These models assume that
much of what drives career behavior is based on personal attributes—like
interests, abilities, values, and personality dispositions—that are largely
molded by genetic endowment and early learning experiences. They also
assume that individuals’ particular mixes of attributes make them better
suited to certain work environments than others. P-E ﬁt models have contributed much to the ﬁeld’s understanding of career behavior and have
helped inform career counseling by highlighting relatively stable features of
persons and environments that, if appropriately matched, are likely to lead
to choices that are both satisfying (from the perspective of the person) and
satisfactory (from the perspective of the environment).
Developmental career theories (e.g., Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume)
emphasize the more or less predictable tasks and challenges that accompany
career development, such as learning about oneself, exploring the world
of work, developing a vocational identity, narrowing down career options
from the larger fund of possibilities, and establishing and maintaining one’s
career. Certain developmental theories are also concerned with how the
work role relates to other life roles (e.g., parent, leisurite), how contextual
factors (e.g., socioeconomic status) affect career trajectories, and—in the case
of constructionist-developmental models—how people partly construct, or
author, their own career/life stories and experiences (Savickas, Chapter 6,
this volume).

Social Cognitive Career Theory

117

SCCT shares certain features with the P-E ﬁt and developmental perspectives. For example, like P-E ﬁt theories, SCCT acknowledges the important
roles that interests, abilities, and values can play within the career development process. SCCT shares with the developmental theories a focus on
how people negotiate particular tasks and milestones (e.g., career choice).
Yet SCCT is also relatively distinctive and designed to complement these
other theories. In contrast to P-E ﬁt approaches, SCCT highlights relatively dynamic and domain-speciﬁc aspects of both people (e.g., self-views,
future expectations, behavior) and their environments (e.g., social supports,
ﬁnancial barriers). Although the relative stability of traits helps in predicting outcomes such as occupational choice, people and environments
do not always remain the same; indeed, they sometimes change dramatically. Witness, for example, the huge changes brought about in the
workplace by technological advances, corporate downsizing, and economic
globalization—and the consequent demands that such changes have placed
on workers to update their skills and to cultivate new interests (or ﬁnd a
new home for their old ones).
By focusing on cognitions, behavior, and other factors that, theoretically,
are relatively malleable and responsive to particular situations and performance domains, SCCT offers an agenda that complements the P-E ﬁt
perspective. An SCCT agenda asks, for example, how are people able to
change, develop, and regulate their own behavior? How do interests differentiate and intensify, or shift, over time? What factors, other than traits,
promote career choice and change? How can career skills be nurtured and
work performances improved? How can work lives be made more satisfying?
Relative to developmental theories, SCCT tends to be less concerned
with the speciﬁcs of ages and stages, yet more concerned with theoretical
elements that may promote or hinder career behavior across developmental
tasks and periods. For this reason, SCCT may provide a complementary
framework from which to address questions that are relevant to particular
developmental theorists, such as how work and other life roles become more
or less salient for particular individuals (Super), how individuals’ career
options become constricted or circumscribed over time (Gottfredson), and
how people are able to affect their own developmental progress (Savickas).
Basic Cognitive-Person Elements of SCCT
The primary foundation for SCCT lies in Bandura’s (1986) general social
cognitive theory, which emphasizes the complex ways in which people,
their behavior, and environments mutually inﬂuence one another. As in
Bandura’s general theory, SCCT assumes that people have the capacity to
exercise some degree of agency or self-direction and that they also contend

118

Career Development and Counseling

with many factors (e.g., environmental supports and barriers) that can
strengthen, weaken, or even override personal agency. SCCT highlights
the interplay among three cognitive-person variables that partly enable
the exercise of agency in career development: self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome
expectations, and personal goals.
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs refer to ‘‘people’s judgments of their capabilities to
organize and execute courses of action required to attain designated types
of performances’’ (Bandura, 1986, p. 391). These beliefs are among the most
important determinants of thought and action in Bandura’s (1986) theory.
Self-efﬁcacy is not a unitary or global trait, like self-esteem (i.e., general
feelings of self-worth), with which it is often confused. Rather, self-efﬁcacy
is conceived as a dynamic set of self-beliefs that are linked to particular
performance domains and activities. An individual might, for instance, hold
strong self-efﬁcacy beliefs regarding his or her ability to play piano or
basketball but feel much less competent at social or mechanical tasks.
These beliefs about personal capabilities, which are subject to change based
on future experiences and are responsive to environmental conditions (e.g.,
How supportive is the piano teacher? How tough is the basketball competition?), are acquired and modiﬁed via four primary informational sources (or
types of learning experience): (1) personal performance accomplishments,
(2) vicarious learning, (3) social persuasion, and (4) physiological and affective states (Bandura, 1997). The impact that these experiential sources have
on self-efﬁcacy depends on a variety of factors, such as how the individual
attends to and interprets them. Prior performance accomplishments often
have the greatest inﬂuence on self-efﬁcacy. Compelling success experiences
with a given task or performance domain (e.g., math) tend to strengthen
self-efﬁcacy beliefs in relation to that task or domain; convincing or repeated
failures tend to weaken these beliefs.
Outcome expectations refer to beliefs about the consequences or outcomes of
performing particular behaviors. Whereas self-efﬁcacy beliefs are concerned
with one’s capabilities (e.g., ‘‘can I do this?’’), outcome expectations involve
imagined consequences of particular courses of action (e.g., ‘‘if I do this, what
will happen?’’). Bandura (1986) described three types of outcome expectations, including the anticipation of physical, social, and self-evaluative
outcomes. He maintained that self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations both
help to determine a number of important aspects of human behavior, such
as the activities that people choose to pursue and the ones they avoid.
Self-efﬁcacy may be the more inﬂuential determinant in many situations
that call for complex skills or potentially costly or difﬁcult courses of action
(e.g., whether to pursue a medical career). In such situations, people may
hold positive outcome expectations (e.g., ‘‘a medical career would offer
lots of prestige and chances to help others’’) but avoid a certain choice

Social Cognitive Career Theory

119

option if they doubt they have the capabilities required to succeed at it
(i.e., ‘‘I am not good at science’’). However, one can also envision scenarios where self-efﬁcacy is high but outcome expectations are low (e.g., a
young woman who is conﬁdent in her math-related capabilities but refrains
from taking elective math courses because she anticipates negative reactions
from her friends).
People develop outcome expectations regarding different academic and
career paths from a variety of direct and vicarious learning experiences,
such as perceptions of the outcomes they have personally received in
relevant past endeavors and the secondhand information they acquire about
different career ﬁelds (e.g., by observing family and community members
or seeing how different forms of work are portrayed in various media).
Self-efﬁcacy can also affect outcome expectations, especially in situations
where outcomes are closely tied to the quality of one’s performance (e.g.,
strong performance on a classroom test typically results in a high grade
and other favorable outcomes). This is because people usually expect to
receive positive outcomes (and avoid negative ones) when performing tasks
at which they feel competent.
Personal goals may be deﬁned as one’s intention to engage in a particular
activity or to produce a particular outcome (Bandura, 1986). Goals address
the question, ‘‘How much and how well do I want to do this?’’ SCCT
distinguishes between choice-content goals (or, more simply, choice goals—
the type of activity or career one wishes to pursue) and performance goals
(the level or quality of performance one plans to achieve within a given
task or domain). Goals offer an important means by which people exercise
agency in their educational and occupational pursuits. By setting personal
goals, people help to organize, direct, and sustain their own behavior, even
over long intervals without external payoffs. The amount of progress people
perceive they are making toward their goals can have important affective
consequences (e.g., feelings of satisfaction or dissatisfaction), which may
help to reshape future choices.
Social cognitive theory maintains that people’s choice and performance
goals are affected by their self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations. For
example, strong self-efﬁcacy and positive outcome expectations in relation to musical performance are likely to nurture music-relevant goals, such
as the intention to devote time to practice, seek performing opportunities,
and perhaps (depending on the nature and strength of one’s self-efﬁcacy and
outcome expectations in other domains) pursue a career in music. Progress
(or lack of progress) in attaining one’s goals, in turn, has a reciprocal
inﬂuence on self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations. Successful goal pursuit may further strengthen self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations within a
positive cycle.

120

Career Development and Counseling

SCCT’s Models of Interest, Choice, Performance, and Satisfaction
SCCT currently consists of four conceptually distinct yet overlapping models focusing on (1) the development of interests, (2) the making of choices,
(3) the inﬂuences on and results of performance, and (4) the experience of
satisfaction, or well-being, in educational and occupational spheres. In each
model, the basic cognitive-person elements—self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, and goals—are seen as operating in concert with other important
aspects of persons (e.g., gender, race/ethnicity), their environments, and
learning experiences to help shape the contours of academic and career
development.
Interest model. Home, educational, and community environments expose
children and adolescents to an array of activities—like crafts, sports, math,
socializing, and computing—that form the substrate for later career or leisure
options. Young people are selectively encouraged by parents, teachers,
peers, and important others to pursue, and try to perform well, certain
activities from among those that are available to them. By practicing different
activities—and by receiving ongoing feedback, both positive and negative,
about the quality of their performances—children and adolescents gradually
reﬁne their skills, develop personal performance standards, and form selfefﬁcacy and outcome expectations regarding different tasks and domains
of behavior. For example, receiving consistent rebuke about one’s athletic
skills or praise about one’s math skills is likely to be reﬂected in the selfefﬁcacy and outcome expectations that one develops in relation to these two
performance domains.
According to SCCT’s interest model, illustrated in Figure 5.1, self-efﬁcacy
and outcome expectations regarding particular activities help to mold
career interests (i.e., each person’s particular pattern of likes, dislikes, and

Self-Efficacy
Expectations
Sources of
Self-Efficacy
and Outcome
Expectations

Interests

Intentions/
Goals for
Activity
Involvement

Activity
Selection
and Practice

Performance
Outcomes
(e.g., Goal Attainment, Skill
Development)

Outcome
Expectations

Figure 5.1 Model of How Basic Career Interests Develop Over Time
Copyright 1993 by R. W. Lent, S. D. Brown, and G. Hackett. Reprinted by permission.

Social Cognitive Career Theory

121

indifference in relation to career-relevant tasks). Interest in an activity is
likely to blossom and endure when people (a) view themselves as competent
(self-efﬁcacious) at the activity and (b) anticipate that performing it will produce valued outcomes (positive outcome expectations). At the same time,
people are likely to develop disinterest or even aversion toward activities
(such as athletics, in the previous example) in which they doubt their efﬁcacy
and expect to receive negative outcomes.
As interests emerge, they—along with self-efﬁcacy and outcome
expectations—encourage intentions, or goals, for sustaining or increasing
one’s involvement in particular activities. Goals, in turn, increase the
likelihood of activity practice, and subsequent practice efforts give rise to a
particular pattern of performance attainments that, for better or worse, help
to revise self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations within an ongoing feedback
loop. This basic process is seen as repeating itself continuously prior to
work entry. As recognized by P-E ﬁt theories, career-related interests do
tend to stabilize over time and, for many people, are quite stable by late
adolescence or early adulthood (see Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume).
SCCT assumes that interest stability is largely a function of crystallizing
self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations, yet that adult interests are
not set in stone. Whether interests change or solidify is determined by
such factors as whether initially preferred activities become restricted and
whether people are exposed (or expose themselves) to compelling learning
experiences (e.g., through volunteering, engaging in leadership roles, child
rearing, using technological tools) that enable them to rethink or expand
their sense of their capabilities and the outcomes offered by different work
activities. Thus, SCCT assumes that, when they occur, shifts in interests are
largely due to changing self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations.
SCCT also takes into account other aspects of people and their environments that affect the acquisition and modiﬁcation of interests. For example,
abilities and values—staples of P-E ﬁt theories—are important in SCCT,
too, but their effects on interest are seen as largely funneled through selfefﬁcacy and outcome expectations. That is, rather than determining interests
directly, objective ability (as reﬂected by test scores, trophies, awards, and
the like) serves to raise or lower self-efﬁcacy beliefs, which, in turn, inﬂuence interests. In other words, self-efﬁcacy functions as an intervening link
between ability and interests. Career-related values are contained within
SCCT’s concept of outcome expectations. Values are traditionally measured
as people’s preferences for particular work conditions or reinforcers (e.g.,
status, money, autonomy). Outcome expectations are measured by examining people’s beliefs about the extent to which their values would be fulﬁlled
by pursuing particular activities or occupations (e.g., how likely is a career
in nursing to provide the work conditions or reinforcers I most value?).

122

Career Development and Counseling

Self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations do not arise in a social vacuum,
nor do they operate alone in shaping interests or other vocational outcomes.
Rather, they are forged and function in the context of other aspects of persons
and their environments, such as gender, race/ethnicity, genetic endowment,
physical health or disability status, and socioeconomic conditions, all of
which can play important roles within the career development process.
Figure 5.2 offers an overview of how, from the perspective of SCCT, selected
person, environment, and learning or experiential variables contribute to
interests and other career outcomes. Given space limitations, we focus on the
roles that gender and race/ethnicity may play relative to the development
of self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations.
SCCT is concerned more with the psychological and social effects of
gender and ethnicity than with the view of sex and race as categorical
physical or biological factors. Gender and ethnicity are seen as linked to
career development in several key ways, especially through the reactions
they evoke from the social-cultural environment and from their relation
to the opportunity structure to which individuals are exposed (e.g., one’s
access to career-relevant models and performance experiences). For example,
gender and ethnicity can inﬂuence the context in which children acquire
self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations. Gender role socialization processes
tend to bias the access that boys and girls receive to experiences necessary
for developing strong efﬁcacy beliefs and positive expectations regarding
male-typed (e.g., science) and female-typed (e.g., helping) activities. Such
processes may help to explain why boys and girls are more likely to develop

Background
Contextual
Affordances

Self-Efficacy
Expectations
Learning
Experiences

Interests

Moderates

Person Inputs
- Predispositions
- Gender
- Race/Ethnicity
- Disability/
Health Status

Moderates

Contextual Influences
Proximal to Choice Behavior

Choice
Goals

Choice
Actions

Performance
Domains and
Attainments

Outcome
Expectations

Figure 5.2 Model of Person, Contextual, and Experiential Factors Affecting
Career-Related Choice Behavior
Note: Direct relations between variables are indicated with solid lines; moderator effects (where a given
variable strengthens or weakens the relation between two other variables) are shown with dashed lines.
Copyright 1993 by R. W. Lent, S. D. Brown, and G. Hackett. Reprinted by permission.

Social Cognitive Career Theory

123

skills (along with beneﬁcial self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations) and,
in turn, interests at tasks that are culturally deﬁned as gender-appropriate
(Hackett & Betz, 1981). In time, these interests, and the choices they nurture,
help to perpetuate well-entrenched patterns of gender segregation in certain
ﬁelds (see Heppner, Chapter 7, this volume).
To a large extent, then, variables like gender and ethnicity may affect interest development and other career outcomes through socially constructed
processes that may appear to operate in the background but that nevertheless can powerfully inﬂuence the differential learning experiences that
give rise to self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations—leading, at times, to
skewed conclusions about what interests or career options are ‘‘right’’ for
certain types of persons. At later stages in the career choice process, gender,
ethnicity, culture, socioeconomic status, and disability conditions may, additionally, be linked to the opportunity structure within which people set and
implement their career choice goals, as is later discussed.
Choice model. In keeping with developmental theories, choosing a career
path is not viewed as a single, static event but, rather, is part of a larger set
of dynamic processes. As SCCT’s interest model illustrates, career choice is
preceded by the development of self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, interests, and skills in different performance domains. Over time, these processes
make certain choice paths attractive and viable for a given individual and
render other options less appealing or likely to be pursued. Moreover, once
initial career choices are made, they are subject to future revision because
individuals and their environments are dynamic entities. Events and circumstances may well transpire that could not have been foreseen during initial
choice making or career entry. New paths (or branches from old paths) may
open up; barriers (e.g., glass ceilings) or calamities (e.g., job loss) may arise;
value and interest priorities may shift over the course of one’s work life.
Thus, it seems prudent to think of career selection as an unfolding process
with multiple inﬂuences and choice points.
For conceptual simplicity, SCCT divides initial choice making into three
component parts: (1) the expression of a primary choice (or goal) to enter
a particular ﬁeld, (2) taking actions designed to implement one’s goal
(e.g., enrolling in a particular training program or academic major), and
(3) subsequent performance experiences (e.g., a pattern of successes or
failures) that form a feedback loop, affecting the shape of one’s future choice
options. This conceptual division identiﬁes logical intervention targets for
preparing people to make career choices, as well as for helping them to deal
with problems in choice making. Throughout the choice process, people
do not choose careers unilaterally; environments also choose people. Thus,

124

Career Development and Counseling

career choice (and choice stability) is a two-way street that is conditioned,
in part, by the environment’s receptivity to the individual and judgments
about his or her ability to meet training and occupational requirements, both
initially and over time. In other words, environmental agents play a ‘‘potent
role in helping to determine who gets to do what and where, for how long,
and with what sorts of rewards’’ (Lent & Sheu, 2010, p. 692).
Similar to Holland’s theory, SCCT assumes that, just as ‘‘birds of a feather
ﬂock together,’’ people’s vocational interests tend to orient them toward
certain choice options that, under supportive conditions, might enable them
to perform preferred activities and to interact with others who have similar
work personalities. For example, a person whose primary interests lie in
the social domain is likely to gravitate toward socially oriented occupations,
allowing him or her to work with others in a helping or teaching capacity.
However, SCCT explicitly recognizes that environments are not always
supportive of individuals’ preferences and people are not always free to
pursue their primary interests. Choice may be constrained, for example,
by family wishes, economic realities (e.g., the need to bring in immediate
income, lack of funding for training), or the quality of one’s prior education.
In such situations, as discussed later, personal interests may play little, if
any, role in career choice. SCCT, therefore, takes into account variables that,
in addition to (or apart from) interests, can inﬂuence the choice process.
SCCT’s choice model, shown in Figure 5.2, acknowledges the processes
that both precede and follow occupational choice. As described earlier, selfefﬁcacy and outcome beliefs are seen as jointly inﬂuencing career-related
interests, which tend to foster career choice goals (i.e., intentions to pursue a
particular career path) that are congruent with one’s interests. Goals, then,
motivate choice actions, or efforts to implement one’s goals (e.g., seeking
relevant training, applying for certain jobs). These actions are, in turn,
followed by a particular pattern of performance successes and failures. For
instance, after gaining entry to an engineering college, a student may have
difﬁculty completing the required math and physics courses. He or she may
also discover that the work conditions and rewards available in engineering
suit him or her less well than had been initially anticipated. These learning
experiences may prompt the student to revise his or her self-efﬁcacy beliefs
and outcome expectations, leading to a shift in interests and goals (e.g.,
selection of a new major or career path).
Let us also take a closer look at how people’s environments affect
the choice process. Each person derives certain ‘‘affordances’’ from the
environment—for instance, social and material resources or deﬁcits—that
help to shape his or her career development (Vondracek, Lerner, &
Schulenberg, 1986). In SCCT, these affordances are divided into two general
types, based on when they occur within the choice process. The ﬁrst type

Social Cognitive Career Theory

125

includes more distal, background inﬂuences (e.g., cultural and gender role
socialization, types of available career role models, skill development
opportunities) that help to shape self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, and,
hence, interests. We had earlier considered these more distal effects of
contextual variables in SCCT’s interest model. The second type involves
proximal environmental inﬂuences that come into play during the active phases
of choice making. Figure 5.2 includes consideration of these distal (lower
left) and proximal (upper right) contextual affordances.
SCCT’s choice model highlights two means by which proximal contextual
factors may function during the processes of setting and implementing career
choice goals. First, SCCT posits that certain conditions may directly affect
people’s choice goals or actions (these direct inﬂuences are represented by
the solid arrows from contextual variables to goals and actions in Figure 5.2).
In certain cultures, for example, one may defer one’s career decisions to
signiﬁcant others in the family, even where the others’ preferred career
path is not all that interesting to the individual. People may also encounter
environmental supports or barriers in relation to the options that they,
themselves, most prefer. Examples include emotional or ﬁnancial support
for pursuing a particular option, job availability in one’s preferred ﬁeld, and
sociostructural barriers, such as discrimination.
Second, contextual variables may affect people’s ability or willingness
to translate their interests into goals and their goals into actions. According to SCCT, career interests are more likely to blossom into goals (and
goals are more likely to be implemented) when people experience strong
environmental supports and weak barriers in relation to their preferred
career paths. By contrast, nonsupportive or hostile conditions can impede
the process of transforming interests into goals and goals into actions.
In statistical terms, this implies that contextual supports and barriers can
moderate the goal transformation process (shown by the dotted paths in
Figure 5.2). That is, the relations of interests to goals, and of goals to actions,
are expected to be stronger in the presence of favorable versus restrictive
environmental conditions.
SCCT explicitly acknowledges that, for a variety of reasons (often economic in nature), many people do not receive support for pursuing their
vocational interests; for them, ‘‘choice’’ may mean selecting from among a
fairly narrow range of less desirable options. Moreover, as Bandura once
observed (personal communication, March 1, 1993), people are not necessarily drawn to work on assembly lines or in coal mines by a consuming
interest in the work itself. Their interests may, in essence, be beside the
point. Job availability in the context of ﬁnancial need may be an overriding
consideration. In SCCT, self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations are shown
as producing separate paths to goals and goal actions, above and beyond

126

Career Development and Counseling

their effects on interests (see Figure 5.2). Thus, when people perceive the
need to make work choices that compromise their interests or for reasons
other than interests—for instance, because of environmental barriers or limited opportunities—their work-seeking decisions may be inﬂuenced less by
interests than by pragmatic contextual, self-efﬁcacy, and outcome expectation considerations. For example, a worker might consider such things as
what work is available, what my family wants me to do, whether I have the
skills to do this work, and whether the payoffs are worth it (i.e., is the option
‘‘good enough’’ to justify its pursuit?).
In sum, SCCT posits that educational and occupational choices are often,
but not always, linked to people’s interests. Economic, cultural, and other
conditions sometimes require a compromise in personal interests. In such
instances, choices are determined by what options are available to the
individual, the nature of his or her self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations, available choice-relevant resources, and the sorts of messages the
individual receives from his or her support system. Environmental factors
(supports and barriers) may also facilitate or hinder the choice implementation process, regardless of whether people are pursuing preferred or
interest-consistent options.
Performance model. SCCT’s model of performance focuses both on the level
(or quality) of attainment individuals achieve in educational and work tasks
(e.g., measures of success or proﬁciency) and the degree to which they persist
at particular tasks or choice paths, especially when they encounter obstacles.
Note that SCCT’s choice and performance models overlap in their focus on
persistence. This is because persistence can be viewed alternatively in terms
of choice stability (the decision to endure at a particular course of action) or
performance adequacy. From the perspective of the environment, persistence
is often considered a sign of performance success because it is assumed that
competent performers will persist (and will be allowed to persist) longer,
resulting in school or college retention and job tenure. However, persistence
is an imperfect indicator of performance adequacy because people can shift
educational or occupational plans for reasons other than deﬁcient capabilities
(e.g., a college student may drop out because of funding problems, a worker
may decide voluntarily to pursue attractive options elsewhere or be laid off
during corporate downsizing).
As shown in Figure 5.3, SCCT sees educational and vocational performance
as involving the interplay among people’s ability, self-efﬁcacy, outcome
expectations, and performance goals. More speciﬁcally, ability—as assessed
by indicators of achievement, aptitude, or past performance—affects performance attainments both (a) directly, for instance, via the task knowledge

Social Cognitive Career Theory

127

Self-Efficacy

Performance
Goals/
Subgoals

Ability/Past
Performance

Performance
Attainment
Level

Outcome
Expectations

Figure 5.3 Model of Task Performance
Copyright 1993 by R. W. Lent, S. D. Brown, and G. Hackett. Reprinted by permission.

and performance strategies that people develop and (b) indirectly, by
serving to inform self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations. That is, people
base their self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations partly on their perceptions
of the skills they currently possess (or can develop), as well as on how well
they have performed, and what outcomes they have received, in relevant
past performance situations. Self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations, in turn,
inﬂuence the level of performance goals that people set for themselves (e.g.,
aiming for an A in algebra or a certain sales ﬁgure at work). Stronger selfefﬁcacy and positive outcome expectations promote more ambitious goals,
which help to mobilize and sustain performance efforts.
Consistent with general social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986), SCCT
posits a feedback loop between performance attainments and subsequent
behavior. That is, markers of success or failure become part of one’s performance history or learning experiences, with the capacity to conﬁrm or
revise one’s self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations within a dynamic cycle.
Although the performance model focuses on person variables, recall that
people develop their talents, self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, and goals
within a larger sociocultural, educational, and economic context. As shown
in Figure 5.2, the learning experiences to which people are exposed and
the outcomes they derive from their performances are intimately related to
features of their environments, such as educational quality, the nature of
available role models, gender role socialization, peer and parental supports,
and community and family norms.
It should also be emphasized that, in SCCT’s performance model,
self-efﬁcacy is seen as complementing—not substituting for—objectively
assessed ability. Complex performances draw on requisite abilities yet are
also aided by an optimistic sense of efﬁcacy, which helps people organize,
orchestrate, and make the most of their talents. What people can accomplish

128

Career Development and Counseling

depends partly on how they interpret and apply their skills, which helps
to explain why individuals with similar objective abilities can achieve
performances that vary greatly in quality (Bandura, 1986). Those who doubt
their capabilities may, for instance, be less likely to use their skills effectively
or to remain focused and perseverant when problems arise.
Although it may be tempting to conclude that higher self-efﬁcacy is always
a good thing, the effects of self-efﬁcacy may, in fact, depend on how high
or low it is in relation to current levels of objective ability. People may
encounter problems when they greatly misjudge their capabilities in either
the positive or negative direction. Self-efﬁcacy that greatly overestimates
current capabilities (i.e., overconﬁdence) may encourage people to attempt
tasks for which they are ill prepared, risking failure and discouragement.
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs that seriously underestimate documented ability (underconﬁdence) may interfere with performance by prompting less effort and
perseverance, lower goals, greater performance anxiety, and avoidance of
realistic challenges (Bandura, 1986). Both types of perceptual bias may hamper skill development. By contrast, self-efﬁcacy that slightly overshoots but
is reasonably congruent with current capabilities (slight overconﬁdence)
promotes optimal skill use and motivation for further skill development.
Satisfaction model. SCCT’s most recent model focuses on factors that inﬂuence
people’s experience of satisfaction, or well-being, in academic and work
settings (Lent & Brown, 2006). Given space constraints and the relative
newness of the model, it is outlined only brieﬂy here (a more detailed
version of the model, including additional variables, such as work stress
and life satisfaction, can be found in Lent & Brown, 2008). As shown in
Figure 5.4, satisfaction (i.e., the degree to which one likes or is happy with
one’s school or work environment) is expected to be inﬂuenced by several
sets of variables that overlap with the previous SCCT models. In particular,
the model posits that people are likely to be happy at school or work to
the extent that they are involved in activities they value, see themselves as
making progress at personally relevant goals, possess strong self-efﬁcacy at
performing necessary tasks and at achieving their goals, and have access to
resources in the environment for promoting their self-efﬁcacy and aiding
their goal pursuit.
In addition, satisfaction is seen as affected by aspects of one’s personality and work conditions. Certain personality traits (e.g., positive and
negative affect) have been found to be reliably linked to job satisfaction.
Work conditions include a variety of environmental features (e.g., favorable
work characteristics, needs-supplies ﬁt, perceived organizational support)
that have also been associated with satisfaction. In addition to their direct
relations to satisfaction, the model acknowledges several indirect paths by

Social Cognitive Career Theory

Personality/Affective Traits
---------------------------------Positive affect/extraversion
Negative affect/neuroticism
Conscientiousness

Self-Efficacy
Expectations

Goal and Efficacy-Relevant
Environmental Supports,
Resources, and Obstacles

129

Participation in/
Progress at GoalDirected Activity

Work Satisfaction

Work Conditions
and Outcomes

Figure 5.4 A Social Cognitive Model of Work Satisfaction
From Lent and Brown (2006). Copyright 2006 Elsevier. Adapted with permission.

which personality and environmental factors may affect work satisfaction
(e.g., certain personality factors may affect perceptions of self-efﬁcacy and
environmental support that, in turn, inﬂuence satisfaction). Although these
indirect paths add complexity to the model, they are necessary to capture the
means by which person and situation factors operate together to affect satisfaction. From a counseling perspective, the model emphasizes potentially
malleable features of the individual (e.g., self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations,
goal selection and progress) and environment (e.g., supportive supervision, mentoring) that can be harnessed to design satisfaction-promoting
interventions.
RESEARCH ON SCCT
SCCT’s four models and many of their speciﬁc predictions have attracted
a good deal of attention from researchers. A full-scale review of research
relevant to SCCT is beyond the scope of this chapter, though some of the
major research trends and ﬁndings can be summarized here. More thorough
reviews and meta-analyses of this literature, cited later, may be consulted
for in-depth assessments of research linking social cognitive theory to career
development processes and outcomes. In this section, I ﬁrst consider the
theory’s overall empirical status and then discuss selected applications of
SCCT to the career behavior of diverse populations.

130

Career Development and Counseling

General Trends and Findings
A substantial body of ﬁndings suggests that social cognitive variables aid
understanding of educational and career behavior prior to, during, and
after work entry. Among the social cognitive variables, self-efﬁcacy has
received the most attention, with traditional qualitative research reviews
concluding that (a) domain-speciﬁc measures of self-efﬁcacy are predictive of career-related interests, choice, achievement, persistence, indecision,
and exploratory behavior; (b) intervention, experimental, and path analytic
studies support certain hypothesized causal relations between measures
of self-efﬁcacy, performance, and interests; and (c) gender differences in
self-efﬁcacy help to explain male–female differences in occupational consideration (e.g., Bandura, 1997; Betz, 2008; Hackett & Lent, 1992; Swanson &
Gore, 2000).
Meta-analytic reviews provide a helpful, quantitative way to integrate
ﬁndings from a large number of independent studies, allowing conclusions
about the strength of relationships across all studies that have addressed
particular hypotheses. Several meta-analyses of research, primarily involving
late adolescents and young adults, have directly tested a number of SCCT’s
hypotheses. Meta-analysis of the interest hypotheses, for instance, indicates
that self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations are each good predictors of
occupational interests and that, as predicted, the relation of ability to interests
appears to operate through (or be mediated by) self-efﬁcacy (Lent et al.,
1994) (see Figures 5.1 and 5.2). A meta-analysis of 53 samples, including
over 37,000 research participants, reported a strong overall relationship
between self-efﬁcacy and career interests (r = .59; Rottinghaus, Larson, &
Borgen, 2003).
Meta-analysis of SCCT’s choice hypotheses has shown that career-related
choices are strongly predicted by interests (r = .60; Lent et al., 1994). Selfefﬁcacy and outcome expectations also relate to career choice both directly
and indirectly, through their linkage to interests (see Figure 5.2) (Lent et al.,
1994). In a recent meta-analysis, Sheu et al. (2010) found that interests,
self-efﬁcacy, and outcome expectations together strongly predicted choice
goals across each of the six Holland themes. Research has also examined
the manner in which perceived environmental supports and barriers relate
to choice goals. The emerging pattern of ﬁndings suggests that, though
supports and barriers yield small direct relations to choice outcomes in
some Holland themes, their primary role may be to strengthen or weaken
self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations that, in turn, promote interest and
choice (Sheu et al., 2010).
Meta-analysis of SCCT’s performance model predictions have thus far
focused on the relation of self-efﬁcacy to various indicators of performance.

Social Cognitive Career Theory

131

Findings have shown that self-efﬁcacy is a useful predictor of both academic
(Multon, Brown, & Lent, 1991) and occupational (Sadri & Robertson, 1993;
Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998) performance, and that certain factors affect the
strength of the self-efﬁcacy-performance relationship. For instance, Multon
et al. (1991) found that self-efﬁcacy was more strongly related to performance
in older versus younger students and in low-achieving versus adequately
achieving students. Recent meta-analyses have conﬁrmed the utility of
self-efﬁcacy in predicting work performance (Brown, Lent, Telander, &
Tramayne, 2011) and academic performance and persistence (Brown et al.,
2008), although performance goals explained unique variance beyond selfefﬁcacy only in predicting academic persistence. Consistent with hypotheses
(see Figure 5.3), ability and past performance success have been linked to
future performance outcomes both directly and indirectly, through intervening self-efﬁcacy beliefs (Brown et al., 2008, 2011; Lent et al., 1994).
Tests of the new SCCT model of satisfaction suggest its potential utility,
though not enough studies have accrued to warrant a meta-analysis at this
point (Sheu & Lent, 2009). Likewise, a number of studies have examined
the sources of information, or learning experiences (see Figure 5.2), that
are assumed to give rise to self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations
(e.g., Schaub & Tokar, 2005), though meta-analyses have yet to aggregate
their results. Of the four primary sources (performance accomplishments,
vicarious learning, social persuasion, physiological and affective states),
performance accomplishments (e.g., indicators of one’s previous success or
failure) typically show the strongest relation to self-efﬁcacy (e.g., Williams &
Subich, 2006). Self-efﬁcacy is, in turn, a good predictor of outcome expectations (Lent et al., 1994; Sheu et al., 2010). Such ﬁndings offer valuable
implications for the design of interventions to promote self-efﬁcacy and
outcome expectations and, in turn, subsequent career outcomes.
Collectively, the meta-analyses are consistent with theoretical assumptions that (a) self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations are good predictors of
interests; (b) one’s ability or performance accomplishments are likely to lead
to interests in a particular domain to the extent that they foster a growing
sense of self-efﬁcacy in that domain; (c) self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations predict career-related choices both directly and indirectly through their
linkage to interests; and (d) performance success is enabled both by abilities
and self-efﬁcacy, which can aid people to organize their skills and persist
despite setbacks.
Applications to Diverse Populations
SCCT was designed to aid understanding of the career development of
a diverse array of students and workers, taking into account such factors

132

Career Development and Counseling

as race/ethnicity, culture, gender, socioeconomic status, age, and disability status. Hackett and Betz (1981) were the ﬁrst scholars to extend social
cognitive theory to career behavior, focusing on how self-efﬁcacy might
illuminate women’s career development. They noted that gender role socialization processes tend to provide girls and young women with biased access
to the sources of efﬁcacy information (e.g., gender-traditional role models,
differential encouragement to pursue culturally prescribed activities). Such
experiences nurture self-efﬁcacy for traditionally female activities but may
limit self-efﬁcacy in nontraditional career domains. Consistent with their
thesis, Betz and Hackett (1981) found that college women reported stronger
self-efﬁcacy for performing occupations that are traditionally dominated by
women than by men, and that these beliefs were linked to their interests in
and consideration of traditional and nontraditional choice options.
Much subsequent research has examined social cognitive variables in
relation to gender. For example, Williams and Subich (2006) found that,
although occupational self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations tended
to be associated with the four primary sources of efﬁcacy across Holland
themes and gender, women and men reported having received differential exposure to these efﬁcacy sources in particular gender-typed domains
(e.g., women reported more Social-type and men more Investigative-type
learning experiences). Such ﬁndings suggest that gender differences in
occupational membership may be partly attributable to gender-based learning/socialization experiences that give rise to self-efﬁcacy and outcome
expectations and, ultimately, interests and choices. Although a number of
studies have reported gender differences in self-efﬁcacy regarding gendertyped tasks and ﬁelds (e.g., mathematics) in general samples of students,
such differences are less commonly found in samples of women and men
who are likely to have had comparable efﬁcacy-building experiences in
particular gender-typed domains (e.g., engineering majors; e.g., Lent et al.,
2005). These sorts of ﬁndings suggest that women’s and men’s career pursuits
can be constricted or expanded by environmentally guided (and self-sought)
learning experiences and, especially, by the types of self-efﬁcacy beliefs and
outcome expectations that such experience enables.
Bandura (1997) has observed that ‘‘cultural constraints, inequitable incentive systems, and truncated opportunity structures are . . . inﬂuential in
shaping women’s career development’’ (pp. 436). Although the impact
may appear to be less insidious, Heppner (Chapter 7, this volume) has noted
that men’s career development may also be hemmed in by such sociostructural factors. Social cognitive theory implies several developmental and
preventive routes for redressing socially imposed limitations. Such routes
include, for example, educating parents and teachers about the implications
of gender-typed efﬁcacy development and about ways to foster self-efﬁcacy

Social Cognitive Career Theory

133

and support systems, thereby enabling children to acquire (and proﬁt from)
performance experiences in as wide a range of activity domains as possible. Indeed, consistent with Gottfredson’s theory (2005), encouragement to
engage in non-gender-stereotypic activities may need to be provided relatively early in children’s lives to preserve the maximum number of options
for later educational and career consideration.
Similar social-cognitive dynamics have been discussed in relation to the
career development of persons of color. Hackett and Byars (1996) noted,
for example, how culturally based exposure to sources of efﬁcacy information (e.g., social encouragement to pursue certain options, experience with
racism, role modeling) may differentially affect African American women’s
career self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome expectations, goals, and subsequent
career progress. Hackett and Byars suggested theory-based methods, such
as developmental interventions, social advocacy, and collective action, to
promote the career growth of African American women. Applications of
SCCT’s basic interest and choice models to Hispanic, African American, and
Asian American student samples has found support for the cross-cultural
relevance of these models (see Lent & Sheu, 2010, for a review).
SCCT has also been extended to a number of other diverse client populations (see Fabian & Pebdani, Chapter 13, and Fouad & Kantamneni, Chapter 8,
this volume). For instance, Szymanski, Enright, Hershenson, and Ettinger
(2003) considered self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations as useful constructs
in understanding the career development of persons with disabilities, and
Fabian (2000) discussed how SCCT could be used to derive career interventions speciﬁcally for adults with psychiatric disabilities. SCCT has also been
used to illuminate aspects of career choice and adjustment in lesbian and gay
workers (e.g., Morrow et al., 1996). Finally, SCCT hypotheses and models
have been found to be viable in emerging cross-cultural and cross-national
tests (e.g., see Lent & Sheu, 2010; Lindley, 2006; Sheu & Lent, 2009).
In sum, research provides support for many of SCCT’s theoretical assumptions about how cognitive-person variables relate to career interests, choice,
performance, and satisfaction. The applications described in this section also
convey SCCT’s potential utility in understanding and facilitating the career
development of persons across a number of diversity dimensions. Despite
the promise of these applications, there is need for additional research
on how social cognitive variables operate together with culture, ethnicity,
socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, and disability status to shape the
career development of students and workers. Additional research is also
needed on the efﬁcacy of SCCT-based interventions (Gainor, 2006). Nevertheless, currently available ﬁndings offer valuable implications for career
education and counseling practice. We consider such implications in the
next section.

134

Career Development and Counseling

APPLYING SCCT TO PRACTICE
SCCT suggests a variety of ideas for promoting development of academic
and career interests and competencies, for preventing or forestalling careerrelated difﬁculties, and for helping people remedy existing problems in
choosing, ﬁnding, or adjusting to work. Suggestions for developmental and
preventive applications can be derived from SCCT’s basic models, especially
from hypotheses about how self-efﬁcacy and the other social cognitive
variables develop in childhood and adolescence. In remedial applications,
the theory may be used as an organizing framework for adapting existing
counseling methods and for developing novel intervention techniques. In this
section, we consider ways in which SCCT may be used to address selected
developmental and remedial concerns.
Promoting Aspirations and Interests in Young Persons
Several researchers have used SCCT as a basis for conceptualizing (Prideaux,
Patton, & Creed, 2002) or evaluating (McWhirter, Rasheed, & Crothers, 2000)
career education programs. Given the typical narrowing of career options
over time (Gottfredson, 2005), these school-based applications of SCCT may
have particular import in preserving as wide a range of occupational alternatives as possible for later consideration. From the perspective of the theory,
several key processes occur during childhood and adolescence—within academic, family, peer, and other settings—that set the stage for later choice
making and adjustment. These processes include acquisition of self-efﬁcacy
and outcome expectations related to diverse activities, development of
career-relevant interests, and formation of career aspirations (i.e., provisional
occupational goals or daydreams). They represent prominent developmental
tasks of the elementary and middle school years and are continually revisited
and reﬁned in high school and beyond (Lent, Hackett, & Brown, 1999).
Young children typically have a very limited grasp of their capabilities, not
to mention career activities and paths. Given their limited experience and
exposure to career role models, their career-related interests and aspirations
are likely to be somewhat stereotypical, narrow, and ﬂuid. Over the course
of childhood and adolescence, people typically receive increasing experience
with varied performance tasks, as well as direct and vicarious exposure to
a widening range of career possibilities. These experiences lead to differentiated beliefs regarding one’s capabilities in diverse activity domains and
an expanded sense of the working conditions and reinforcers afforded by
different career options. Emergent self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations, in
turn, nurture career-relevant interests and goals that tend to become more
deﬁned and crystallized over time, yet are still relatively modiﬁable based
on additional learning about the self (e.g., personal capabilities, values) and

Social Cognitive Career Theory

135

careers (e.g., skill requirements, available reinforcers). In this way, career
aspirations tend to become increasingly responsive to personal interests,
capabilities, values, and environmental conditions (e.g., family and cultural
expectations, economic realities).
This analysis suggests that self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations—and
the experiences on which they are based—are key to the cultivation of
students’ academic and career interests and to the range and types of
occupational options they are willing to consider. At the same time, students’ career aspirations can become constricted either because they acquire
inaccurate self-efﬁcacy or outcome expectations or because their environments provide limited or biased exposure to particular efﬁcacy-building
experiences (e.g., few opportunities to succeed at scientiﬁc pursuits, an
absence of gender-similar role models in math). Developmental interventions designed to promote favorable self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations
are likely to be most useful during childhood and adolescence, before interests and aspirations become relatively stable and certain options become
prematurely foreclosed.
The four sources of efﬁcacy information can be used as an organizing
structure for psychoeducational interventions. Personal performance accomplishments are a particularly valuable intervention target, given their potent
effects on self-efﬁcacy. Incrementally graded success experiences can foster
a sense of efﬁcacy at particular tasks, yet it is also important to attend to how
students interpret the quality of their performances. For example, objective
successes may not impact self-efﬁcacy if students attribute their good grades
to luck, effort, or task ease. This is a common occurrence in the case of girls’
achievements in math, science, and other nontraditional activities (Hackett,
1995). Efforts to modify students’ self-efﬁcacy may, therefore, proﬁt from
inclusion of cognitive restructuring procedures that encourage students to
entertain self-enhancing performance attributions (e.g., crediting one’s success to developing personal capabilities, viewing ability as an acquirable
attribute rather than a ﬁxed, inborn entity).
Useful intervention elements can also be fashioned from the other three
sources of efﬁcacy information. For example, modeling can be used to assist
students in exploring academic and career domains that they may not have
previously encountered or been encouraged to consider. Students are most
likely to identify with role models they perceive as similar to themselves in
terms of gender, ethnicity, and other demographic features. Social support
and persuasion can be used to encourage students to attempt new tasks, to
persist despite initial setbacks, and to interpret their performances favorably,
for example, by focusing on skill growth versus ultimate task success.
Physiological and affective states may also require attention where, for
example, task-related anxiety appears to be diminishing self-efﬁcacy and

136

Career Development and Counseling

disrupting performance. Relaxation exercises and other cognitive-behavioral
strategies can be used to reduce debilitative anxiety.
Content-speciﬁc efﬁcacy beliefs (e.g., in math and other school subjects)
need not be the only focus of efﬁcacy-building efforts. It also seems desirable
to encourage self-efﬁcacy and skills at larger ‘‘career process’’ domains, such
as communication, teamwork, conﬂict management, leadership, and multicultural sensitivity. Such general skill domains have been seen as integral to
students’ transition from school to work (Lent et al., 1999). In addition to a
focus on self-efﬁcacy enhancement, SCCT would encourage a variety of other
developmental intervention targets. In particular, exposure to accurate career
information (see Gore, Leuwerke, & Kelly, Chapter 18, this volume) is key
to fostering acquisition of realistic outcome expectations (i.e., beliefs about
the working conditions and reinforcers available in diverse occupations).
SCCT would also encourage age-appropriate interventions designed to
help students explore their emerging interests and the occupational options
with which they may be compatible. Such interventions would best be
approached with the explicit understanding (communicated to parents,
teachers, and students) that interests, goals, values, and skills are ﬂuid
attributes that can change and grow with additional experience. Assessment
may thus best be viewed as a snapshot at a single point in time, rather than
a reﬂection of immutable qualities. Finally, SCCT would encourage a focus
on fostering skills in decision making and goal setting (e.g., breaking larger
distal goals into proximal subgoals, locating supports for personal goals).
Such self-regulation skills can be taught by using examples from domains,
such as studying or friendships, that are meaningful to young people and
that can be generalized to career development.
Facilitating Career Choice Making and Implementation
In an ideal scenario, people arrive at late adolescence or early adulthood with
(a) a good appreciation of their interests, values, and talents; (b) an understanding of how these self-attributes correspond with potential vocational
options; (c) clear goals, or choices, that link their self-attributes to suitable
occupational paths (i.e., ones that can engage their interests, satisfy their values, and value their talents); (d) adequate skills at making decisions, setting
goals, and managing goal pursuit; (e) an environment that provides support for their goals (e.g., social encouragement, mentors, ﬁnancial resources)
and minimal goal-related barriers; and (f) a set of personality traits (e.g.,
low levels of negative affectivity, high levels of conscientiousness) that can
generally aid the process of making and implementing important life decisions by, for example, minimizing chronic indecisiveness and maximizing
follow-through with goals and plans.

Social Cognitive Career Theory

137

Those who possess ample amounts of these personal and environmental
resources are unlikely to seek the services of a career counselor. Unfortunately, however, problems may occur in any or all of these areas—and
various other challenges, such as physical disabilities or difﬁculties in life
domains apart from work/career, may arise as well—that can hamper an
individual’s efforts at occupational choice making and implementation.
Well-prepared career counselors are able to assist with a wide array of these
choice-limiting problems. A full-scale discussion of career choice problems
and solutions is beyond the scope of this chapter, but here we highlight a few
strategies, derived from SCCT, that can aid in navigating certain impasses
to choice making and implementation.
Expanding choice options. Like most other approaches to career choice counseling, SCCT aims to help clients select from an array of occupations that
correspond reasonably well with important aspects of their work personalities (e.g., interests, values, skills). Some clients are blocked in this effort
because their work personalities are not sufﬁciently differentiated (e.g.,
measured interests produce a low, ﬂat proﬁle) or because they feel stiﬂed
by a constricted range of career options. In such instances, my colleagues
and I have found it helpful to explore the social cognitive processes that
may underlie choice problems, adapting assessment strategies that are commonly used in career counseling (e.g., Brown & Lent, 1996). An important
implication of SCCT’s interest model is that people often reject potentially
viable options because of inaccurate self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations
(e.g., a person may believe, erroneously, that he or she does not have the
skills to perform effectively in a given occupation or that the occupation
does not offer the working conditions that he or she values). By revisiting
previously discarded options and considering the reasons they have been
discarded, career clients can often clarify their interests, skills, and values
and also expand the range of potentially satisfying options from which they
may choose.
We have used two strategies to explore discarded options. In the ﬁrst
strategy, standardized measures of vocational interests, values/needs, and
aptitudes are administered, and the results are examined for discrepancies
between the choice options generated by the various measures. We especially
look for aptitude–interest and value–interest discrepancies. Instances in
which clients appear to have the aptitude to succeed at particular occupations
but show relatively low interest may suggest that personal capabilities are
being discounted (i.e., that interests may not have developed because one’s
self-efﬁcacy is unrealistically low). Similarly, instances in which a client’s
values appear compatible with particular options but the client shows little

138

Career Development and Counseling

interest may suggest inaccurate outcome expectations (i.e., he or she may
possess limited or biased information about the occupations, resulting in
faulty assumptions about their potential to meet his or her needs). Such
discrepancies are targeted for further discussion and, possibly, counseling
aimed at boosting self-efﬁcacy or instilling accurate outcome expectations.
Our second strategy for exploring foreclosed occupational options uses a
modiﬁed vocational card sort procedure. We ﬁrst ask clients to sort a list of
occupations into three categories: (1) might choose, (2) would not choose, and
(3) in question. We then focus on those occupations that are sorted into the
‘‘would not choose’’ and ‘‘in question’’ categories. The client is encouraged
to sort these occupations into more speciﬁc categories reﬂecting self-efﬁcacy
beliefs (‘‘might choose if I thought I had the skills’’), outcome expectations
(‘‘might choose if I thought it could offer things I value’’), deﬁnite lack of
interest (‘‘wouldn’t choose under any circumstances’’), or other. Occupations
sorted into the self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectation subcategories are then
explored for accuracy of skill and outcome perceptions. As with the ﬁrst
strategy, further assessment, efﬁcacy building, or information gathering may
then be employed to challenge faulty assumptions about self or career and
to maximize the range of possible choice options. (See Brown & Lent, 1996,
for case examples of the use of each strategy with adult clients.)
Coping with barriers and building supports. A key assumption of SCCT’s choice
model is that people are more likely to implement career choices (i.e., to
translate their goals into actions) if they perceive that their preferred options
will be accompanied by minimal barriers and ample supports. Conversely,
clients who expect, for example, that their signiﬁcant others will discourage
their favored path, or that they will not be able to access the ﬁnancial support
they need to pursue their choice, may be less willing to follow through
with their goals. These assumptions have led us to build consideration of
potential supports and barriers directly into the choice counseling process.
In particular, we have developed a set of steps to help clients (a) anticipate
possible barriers to implementing their choices, (b) analyze the likelihood
of encountering these barriers, (c) prepare barrier-coping strategies (i.e.,
methods for preventing or managing likely barriers), and (d) build supports
for their goals within their family, peer, and other social networks.
We have used a modiﬁed ‘‘decisional balance sheet’’ procedure to help
clients identify potential choice barriers. Speciﬁcally, we ask clients to generate both positive and negative consequences in relation to each career option
they are seriously considering. We then have them focus on the negative
consequences that might prevent them from pursuing each option. Next,
the client is asked to estimate the chances that each barrier will actually be

Social Cognitive Career Theory

139

encountered, and strategies are developed and rehearsed for preventing or
managing the most likely barriers. Brown and Lent (1996) illustrated the
use of these barrier-coping methods with a client who had been reluctant
to pursue her preferred option because she feared it would jeopardize her
romantic relationship. After identifying and analyzing this barrier, the client
was helped to neutralize it by negotiating a dual-career strategy with her
partner, enabling her to preserve her favored career option.
In addition to anticipating and preparing to deal with barriers, it can be
very useful to assist clients in building support systems to sustain their
choice efforts (Lent et al., 2000). In fact, support building has been identiﬁed
as a critical ingredient in successful career choice counseling (see Whiston &
James, Chapter 20, this volume). Once clients have identiﬁed preferred career
goals, they can be encouraged to consider (a) what steps they need to take
to implement their goals, (b) what environmental (e.g., social, ﬁnancial)
resources could help them achieve these steps, and (c) what resources they
could use to offset any likely choice barriers. Counselors can also help
clients consider where and how to access needed supports. In many cases,
clients’ existing support systems can provide resources useful to their goal
pursuit (e.g., access to relevant job contacts). In other cases, resources may be
obtained by cultivating new or alternative support systems (e.g., developing
friendships with peers who will support, rather than ridicule, one’s academic
or career aspirations).
Clients’ families are often central to their career choice-making and implementation efforts, particularly in collectivist cultures. It is, therefore, useful
to build into counseling a consideration of how the client’s preferred
options mesh with the wishes of his or her family (or signiﬁcant others).
Clients sometimes need assistance in negotiating conﬂicts between their
own goals and others’ goals for them. Barrier-coping and support-building
strategies in such instances can, for example, include role-play or two-chair
dialogues with signiﬁcant others or, depending on the cultural context and
the client’s preferences, inviting signiﬁcant others to participate in a portion
of choice counseling.
Goal setting and self-regulation. Some clients need assistance with the processes of setting goals and sustaining goal pursuits, especially if they tend to
demonstrate low levels of conscientiousness. These processes involve career
self-regulation skills that can help clients achieve their plans, especially in
the future, after counseling has been completed. Once a choice goal has been
selected, many factors can affect the likelihood that clients will act on it.
We have already considered the possible effects of environmental supports
and barriers. Another important factor affecting choice implementation is
the manner in which people frame their goals. For example, larger, ultimate

140

Career Development and Counseling

goals are more likely to be enacted if they are clear, speciﬁc, divided into manageable subgoals (e.g., taking preparatory courses, applying to educational
programs), set close in time to intended actions, stated publicly, and held
with strong commitment (Bandura, 1986). By contrast, vague, amorphous,
distal, private, and weakly held goals provide less reliable guides for action.
Clients can, therefore, be encouraged to frame their goals in facilitative (e.g.,
clear, speciﬁc, proximal) terms and to consider speciﬁc steps and resources
needed to implement their goals. Because not all possible barriers to choice
implementation can be anticipated and averted, clients can be encouraged
to remain ﬂexible and adaptable in their decisional stance, for example, by
preparing backup plans.
Facilitating Work Performance
SCCT offers several implications for efforts to promote academic and career
success and optimize performance. The basic hypotheses of SCCT’s performance model suggest that self-efﬁcacy beliefs can facilitate attainment in
a given academic or career domain as long as an individual possesses at
least minimally adequate levels of the skills required in that domain. This
does not mean that increased conﬁdence alone will guarantee success, but it
does imply, as suggested earlier, that self-efﬁcacy can help people make the
most of the skills they have and also facilitate further development of one’s
skills. Thus, methods designed to boost self-efﬁcacy beliefs may be valuable
both in developmentally oriented skill-building programs (discussed earlier
in relation to promoting aspirations) and in remedial efforts with persons
experiencing performance difﬁculties.
A basic strategy for improving performance begins with examining possible discrepancies between self-efﬁcacy estimates and data on objectively
assessed skills or past performance. Intervention procedures may then be
designed that are responsive to the type of discrepancy that is identiﬁed. For
example, where the client possesses adequate skills but weak self-efﬁcacy
beliefs in a given performance domain, the theory would suggest the value of
activities designed to help him or her (a) obtain personal mastery experiences
with progressively more challenging tasks in that domain, (b) review past
success experiences, and (c) interpret past and present successes in ways
that promote, rather than discount, perceived competence. Similar to earlier
suggestions for promoting self-efﬁcacy beliefs, clients can be encouraged to
attribute success experiences at skill development to internal, stable factors,
particularly personal ability, rather than to internal, unstable (e.g., effort)
or external (luck, task simplicity) factors. As clients succeed at performance
tasks or as they review past experiences, they can also be asked for their

Social Cognitive Career Theory

141

perceived reasons for task success. Nonadaptive attributions can be challenged, for example, by having clients generate and evaluate alternative
interpretations for their performance successes (Brown & Lent, 1996).
This focus on mastery experiences can be augmented by counseling
activities that draw on other sources of self-efﬁcacy. For instance, providing
exposure to relevant models, verbal support, or assistance with anxiety
coping can elevate self-efﬁcacy and, in turn, promote skill development
and performance. In addition, SCCT points to outcome expectations and
performance goals as operating, along with self-efﬁcacy, as key motivators
of performance. Thus, performance-focused counseling might also entail
efforts to instill beneﬁcial outcome expectations (e.g., accurate knowledge of
work conditions and reinforcers) and realistic, yet challenging performance
goals (e.g., ones that are achievable yet stretch and further reﬁne one’s skills).
More intensive remedial skill-building efforts, organized around the
sources of efﬁcacy information, may be indicated where clients exhibit both
weak self-efﬁcacy and deﬁcient skills. There will also be situations where
the extent of the skill deﬁcit is very large, the client is unwilling to engage
in (or may be unlikely to proﬁt from) remedial activities, or the environment
(e.g., college, work organization) is unwilling to support remediation or
has decided to terminate the student or employee. In P-E ﬁt terms, such
scenarios reﬂect a serious mismatch between the individual’s skills and the
skill requirements of the setting. In such cases, educational or career choice
(or change) counseling can be offered, with the goal of identifying suitable,
alternative academic or occupational options having ability requirements
that better correspond with the client’s current skills. It should be emphasized that SCCT does not imply that self-efﬁcacy will compensate for a lack
of requisite skills or that efforts to boost self-efﬁcacy are always indicated;
in fact, such efforts seem unlikely to affect performance (and any gains in
self-efﬁcacy may not be sustained) if they ignore seriously deﬁcient skills.
Promoting Work Satisfaction
The central variables of SCCT’s satisfaction model could be used as a
structure for assessment as well as for designing interventions to promote
satisfaction. Because a variety of person, behavior, and context factors can
contribute to work satisfaction, it is important to identify the key factor
or set of factors that may be relevant for a particular client. Counseling
for work satisfaction would then depend on how the source(s) of satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) are conceptualized. SCCT-based strategies could
include, for example, helping clients access desired work conditions, activities, or reinforcers (e.g., via job redesign or skill updating); set and make
progress toward valued goals (e.g., by framing clear, proximal, intrinsic, and

142

Career Development and Counseling

challenging yet attainable goals); marshal needed supports and resources
for goal pursuit and other aspects of career development; enhance task and
goal-related self-efﬁcacy; reﬁne skills (e.g., interpersonal, self-regulation,
technical) required for work success and the rewards it can bring; cope with
negative aspects of one’s job (e.g., managing stress); engage in self-advocacy
(e.g., in dealing with harsh or uncivil work conditions); or manage the
cognitive and behavioral aspects of affective traits that may predispose one
toward work dissatisfaction.
Like P-E ﬁt theories, SCCT acknowledges that work dissatisfaction can
result from incongruence between personal and environmental attributes
and that this displeasure can, therefore, be reduced by improving the ﬁt
between P and E. For example, value-reinforcer discorrespondence may
be addressed via worker–supervisor negotiation, job restructuring, or skill
development. One important difference from traditional P-E ﬁt theories,
however, is that SCCT assumes that poor ﬁt can occur along any number
of dimensions (e.g., interest, personality, value, skill) that may be salient
to the individual. Another difference is the assumption that the subjective
perception of P-E ﬁt is often more inﬂuential than objectively assessed ﬁt in
determining one’s satisfaction with the work environment. These differences
underline the value of multifaceted ﬁt assessment and counseling strategies
that may extend beyond what P-E theories would prescribe. (Brown &
Lent, 1996, described examples of SCCT-based counseling that had been
initiated by clients experiencing work dissatisfaction due to poor perceived
ﬁt between their values or skills and the reinforcers or requirements of their
work settings.)
Although focusing on potentially modiﬁable aspects of work satisfaction,
SCCT also acknowledges person and context factors that may limit gains
in satisfaction (e.g., nonsupportive organizational leadership or policies).
Where work satisfaction cannot be promoted in other ways, job or career
change counseling may be considered, assuming that individuals feel free
to make such changes and that they have the necessary resources to do so.
Where work change options are constrained (as they are for many unhappy
workers during the current economic recession), coping and compensatory
strategies might be considered, such as pursuing goal-directed activity in
other life domains (e.g., leisure, family, community) that offer alternative
outlets for satisfaction.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
SCCT is an evolving framework that highlights cognitive-person variables,
such as self-efﬁcacy, and considers how they function, along with other
person and environment factors (e.g., gender, culture, barriers, supports) in

Social Cognitive Career Theory

143

shaping people’s occupational paths. Although SCCT assumes that people
exercise varying degrees of agency in their own career development, it also
recognizes conditions that can either limit or strengthen people’s ability
to inﬂuence their school and work lives. The theory consists of models of
academic and career interest, choice, performance, and satisfaction. A model
of career self-management, designed to complement the current four SCCT
models by focusing on the use of adaptive career behaviors, is currently
under development.
The following are some practical messages to take away from this chapter:
• Interests are generally a reliable predictor of educational and career

choices, but they are not the only such predictor. Especially where people
need to compromise their interests in making choices (e.g., due to family
or ﬁnancial considerations), self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations can
augment or surpass interests in directing choices. This underlines the
importance of promoting self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations
that are positive yet realistic.
• The four primary sources of efﬁcacy information can be used to structure
interventions designed to promote the development of interests and
skills. Efﬁcacy-based interventions can be especially helpful in cases of
ﬂat interest proﬁles or where interests have been constrained by limited
or biased exposure to efﬁcacy-building experiences.
• Incrementally graded success experiences, coupled with efforts to ensure
favorable interpretation of those experiences, can be especially useful in
bolstering self-efﬁcacy and the outcomes to which it can lead.
• Outcome expectations can be fostered by ensuring exposure to accurate
sources of educational and occupational information that help clients
learn about choice options that can satisfy their values.
• Choice-content and performance goals are important motivators, respectively, of the options that people choose and the levels of performance
and persistence they attain in school and work settings. Progress toward
personal goals also promotes feelings of work satisfaction. It is important, therefore, that people set and pursue goals in ways that enable
them to achieve their own objectives (e.g., by framing clear, speciﬁc,
proximal subgoals).
• Career development occurs in a social learning context and is facilitated
by the presence of supportive environmental conditions (e.g., goodquality education) and the relative absence of barriers (e.g., lack of
ﬁnancial resources for training). Career development can be promoted
by exposing children and adolescents, as much as possible, to favorable
conditions (e.g., access to diverse coping models) that might offset
negative ones (e.g., gender discrimination).

144

Career Development and Counseling

• Support-building and barrier-coping methods can be especially useful

adjuncts to educational and career choice counseling. By anticipating
and preparing for likely obstacles to their preferred choices and by
marshaling needed supports, clients might be enabled to persist toward
their goals despite setbacks.
• Adjustment to work, as deﬁned by satisfaction and effective performance, can be facilitated by interventions that attend to self-efﬁcacy,
outcome expectations, goals, and behaviors, along with supportive work
conditions.
REFERENCES
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New York, NY: Freeman.
Betz, N. E. (2008). Advances in vocational theories. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 357–374). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Betz, N. E., & Hackett, G. (1981). The relationship of career-related self-efﬁcacy
expectations to perceived career options in college women and men. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 28, 399–410.
Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 354–366.
Brown, S. D., Lent, R. W., Telander, K., & Tramayne, S. (2011). Social cognitive career
theory, conscientiousness, and work performance: A meta-analytic path analysis.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79, 81–90.
Brown, S. D., Tramayne, S., Hoxha, D., Telander, K., Fan, X., & Lent, R. W.
(2008). Social cognitive predictors of college students’ academic performance
and persistence: A meta-analytic path analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 72,
298–308.
Fabian, E. S. (2000). Social cognitive theory of careers and individuals with serious
mental health disorders: Implications for psychiatric rehabilitation programs.
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 23, 262–269.
Gainor, K. A. (2006). Twenty-ﬁve years of self-efﬁcacy in career assessment and
practice. Journal of Career Assessment, 14, 161–178.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown, & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hackett, G. (1995). Self-efﬁcacy in career choice and development. In A. Bandura
(Ed.), Self-efﬁcacy in changing societies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Hackett, G., & Betz, N. E. (1981). A self-efﬁcacy approach to the career development
of women. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 18, 326–336.

Social Cognitive Career Theory

145

Hackett, G., & Byars, A. M. (1996). Social cognitive theory and the career development
of African American women. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 322–340.
Hackett, G., & Lent, R. W. (1992). Theoretical advances and current inquiry in career
psychology. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology
(2nd ed., pp. 419–451). New York, NY: Wiley.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2006). Integrating person and situation perspectives
on work satisfaction: A social-cognitive view. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69,
236–247.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2008). Social cognitive career theory and subjective
well-being in the context of work. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 6–21.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2012). A social cognitive model of career self-management.
Unpublished manuscript.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive
theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance [Monograph].
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 45, 79–122.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers
to career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
36–49.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., Sheu, H., Schmidt, J., Brenner, B. R., Gloster,
C. S., . . . Treistman, D. (2005). Social cognitive predictors of academic interests
and goals in engineering: Utility for women and students at historically Black
universities. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52, 84–92.
Lent, R. W., & Hackett, G. (1994). Sociocognitive mechanisms of personal
agency in career development: Pantheoretical prospects. In M. L. Savickas &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in career development theories: Implications for
science and practice (pp. 77–102). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Lent, R. W., Hackett, G., & Brown, S. D. (1999). A social cognitive view of school-towork transition. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 297–311.
Lent, R. W., & Sheu, H. (2010). Applying social cognitive career theory across
cultures: Empirical status. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C.
M. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural counseling (3rd ed., pp. 691–701).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lindley, L. D. (2006). The paradox of self-efﬁcacy: Research with diverse populations.
Journal of Career Assessment, 14, 143–160.
McWhirter, E. H., Rasheed, S., & Crothers, M. (2000). The effects of high school
career education on social-cognitive variables. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
330–341.
Morrow, S. L., Gore, P. A., & Campbell, B. W. (1996). The application of a sociocognitive framework to the career development of lesbian women and gay men. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 48, 136–148.
Multon, K. D., Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1991). Relation of self-efﬁcacy beliefs to
academic outcomes: A meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
38, 30–38.

146

Career Development and Counseling

Prideaux, L., Patton, W., & Creed, P. (2002). Development of a theoretically derived
school career program: An Australian endeavor. International Journal for Educational
and Vocational Guidance, 2, 115–130.
Rottinghaus, P. J., Larson, L. M., & Borgen, F. H. (2003). The relation of self-efﬁcacy
and interests: A meta-analysis of 60 samples. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62,
221–236.
Sadri, G., & Robertson, I. T. (1993). Self-efﬁcacy and work-related behavior: A review
and meta-analysis. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 42, 139–152.
Schaub, M., & Tokar, D. M. (2005). The role of personality and learning experiences
in social cognitive career theory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 304–325.
Sheu, H., & Lent, R. W. (2009). A social cognitive perspective on well-being in
educational and work settings: Cross-cultural considerations. International Journal
for Educational and Vocational Guidance, 9, 45–60.
Sheu, H., Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., Miller, M. J., Hennessy, K. D., & Duffy, R. D.
(2010). Testing the choice model of social cognitive career theory across Holland
themes: A meta-analytic path analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76, 252–264.
Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998). Self-efﬁcacy and work-related performance: A
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 240–261.
Swanson, J. L., & Gore, P. A. (2000). Advances in vocational psychology theory and
research. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd
ed., pp. 233–269). New York, NY: Wiley.
Szymanski, E. M., Enright, M. S., Hershenson, D. B., & Ettinger, J. M. (2003). Career
development theories, constructs, and research: Implications for people with
disabilities. In E. M. Szymanski & R. M. Parker (Eds.), Work and disability: Issues
and strategies in career development and job placement (2nd ed., pp. 91–153). Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Vondracek, F. W., Lerner, R. M., & Schulenberg, J. E. (1986). Career development:
A life-span developmental approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Williams, C. M., & Subich, L. M. (2006). The gendered nature of career related
learning experiences: A social cognitive career theory perspective. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 69, 262–275.

CHAPTER 6

Career Construction Theory
and Practice
MARK L. SAVICKAS

T

construction explains the interpretive and interpersonal processes through which individuals construct themselves,
impose direction on their vocational behavior, and make meaning of
their careers. Intended for use in a multicultural society and global economy,
the conceptual framework provides a contemporary explanation of careers
and informs a model for career counseling. To accomplish its goals, career
construction theory addresses how individuals build careers through personal constructivism and social constructionism. It asserts that individuals
construct representations of reality, yet they do not construct reality itself.
Furthermore, the theory views careers from a contextualist perspective, one
that conceptualizes development as driven by adaptation to an environment rather than by maturation of inner structures. Viewing careers from
constructionist and contextual perspectives concentrates attention on selfconstruction. With self-construction central to the theory, I ﬁrst consider how
people make themselves into who they are and then describe contemporary
perspectives on career. This discussion leads to three central perspectives
on self that form the foundations of career construction theory: self as actor,
self as agent, and self as author. I then elaborate on these three perspectives
and explain how they structure a scheme for career intervention and inform
a model for career construction counseling. A case study demonstrating the
counseling model concludes the chapter.
HE THEORY OF CAREER

147

148

Career Development and Counseling

SELF-MAKING
Making a self and constructing a career involve lifelong projects that evolve
in complex phases and multilayered processes (McAdams & Olson, 2010).
Individuals compose a self and career by reﬂecting on experience, using
the uniquely human capacity to be conscious of consciousness. This selfconscious reﬂection uses language to both construct and constitute social
realities (Neuman & Nave, 2009). In a sense, we live inside language. Words
provide a resource for living that enables thinking and meaning making.
Words do not come to adhere to an essential, preexisting self. Rather,
language provides the words for the reﬂexive projects of making a self,
shaping an identity, and constructing a career. That is, language enables the
subjectivity needed to reﬂect on our actions and think about who we want
to become and what work we want to do. We also use language to hold
in place the self-awareness emerging from reﬂexivity. In a sense, language
contains the self, and stories carry the career.
Although we talk our own selves into existence, we need more than
language for self-construction. We need experiences on which to reﬂect,
particularly interpersonal experiences, because a self is built from the outside
in, not from the inside out. Using language as a tool, we coordinate our
actions and social relations. So, a self is not actually self-constructed; it
is coconstructed through interpersonal processes. We need each other to
make sense of ourselves and the world in which we live. In the process
of sense making, the idea of self as a separate person arises. Through selfconscious awareness, the self recognizes itself. This self-consciously created
idea of a separate self becomes ﬁlled with stories about experience. In a
sense, self-conscious reﬂection through language is the process that makes
a self, and the resulting stories are the content that constitutes the self in
the form of favored attributes and signiﬁcant events. In sum, self denotes
an emergent awareness that is culturally shaped, socially constituted, and
linguistically narrated.
Perspectives on Self-Making
The processes of self-making and career construction differ during childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood. Individuals begin self-construction as actors,
later become agents that direct the action, and then develop into authors who
explain the action (McAdams & Olson, 2010). Concentrating on each of these
three layers of self-construction has led to theories that privilege distinct
perspectives on vocational behavior and career development. To move
toward the goal of crafting a comprehensive theory that includes all three
views, I use social constructionism as a metatheory. Social constructionism
asserts that reality does not exist independent of us. Rather, we construct

Career Construction Theory and Practice

149

reality through social processes and interpersonal relationships. From the
epistemological position of social constructionism, I then attend to three
layers of the self by adapting the tripartite model of personality theories
devised by McAdams (1995). Each layer of self as object, subject, or project
offers a different and useful way to think about vocational behavior and
career construction.
Self as object. The self as actor dominates the objective view of person–
environment ﬁt that matches individuals to occupations. This is the ﬁrst and
foundational view of a vocational self that originated early in the 20th century
and reached its pinnacle in Holland’s (1997) RIASEC model of vocational
choices and work environments (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume). It serves
industrial societies that need to match workers to occupations.
Self as subject. After World War II, a second perspective emerged to supplement the objective view on self. A subjective view on self as agent emerged
from humanistic beliefs about self-discovery and self-actualization. Donald
Super (1951; see Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume) applied this subjective
view of striving toward self-determined goals in his developmental theory
of career stages and tasks. Maslow (1954) and Super (1957) articulated a
progressive, hierarchical view of self that ﬁt the bureaucratic structure of
corporate societies in which individuals set goals, accomplished tasks, and
climbed the ladder of success.
Self as project. Concurrent with the digital revolution, a new perspective
on self as a project has evolved (Savickas, 2011b). With the move to an
information society and a global economy, the corporate structure that
sustained career ladders has dissipated. People can no longer count on
building a 30-year career in one organization and then retiring with a pension
and health care. Although full-time employment remains the dominant
form of work, temporary assignments and part-time positions are replacing
permanent, full-time jobs. Long-term careers exist for only a minority of
workers. For many individuals, work takes the shape of a project with a
beginning assignment and an ending product. A quarter of workers have
been with their current employer for less than a year. Half of workers
have been with their current employer for less than 5 years (Mullins, 2009).
Precarious work makes for insecure workers (Kalleberg, 2009). Rather than
developing a stable life based on secure employment, today insecure workers
must be ﬂexible in maintaining employability through lifelong learning and
adapting to occupational transitions. Rather than make plans, individuals
must prepare themselves for possibilities.

150

Career Development and Counseling

Career Constructing
Society’s reorganization of work from permanent jobs into temporary assignments prompts a reconceptualization of careers. During the 20th century,
career meant a path through work life. Thus, objective career denotes the
sequence of positions that an individual occupies from school through
retirement. Everyone has an objective career, one that other people may
observe across time. Super (1957) portrayed a typical career as a pattern of
predictable stages. This career narrative, with its linear trajectory of vocational development tasks during a 30-year tenure in one company, captured
the story of work life for many middle-class individuals during the last
half of the 20th century. However, today the new social contract between
organizations and workers has prompted management and human resource
scholars to reconceptualize the meaning of career. Super’s metanarrative of
career stages and tasks dissolves with the loss of the predictable scripts and
identiﬁable paths on which it was based. The story narrated by Super (1957)
portrayed career as a value of hierarchical organizations. The company
owned the employee’s career. Today, individuals own their careers—it is
now ‘‘me incorporated.’’ Accordingly, management scholars have conceptualized career from a predictable and linear progression through working
lives to something that is boundaryless (Arthur, 1994) and protean (Hall, 1996).
The 21st-century version of boundaryless, protean careers transforms the
story from one about maturation in a stable medium to one about adaptation to a changing landscape. This transformation requires a fundamental
change in perspective from which vocational psychologists and career counselors may envision careers in a global economy. The 20th-century metaphor
of career as a recognizable path through life has now changed to the
21st-century metaphor of career as a carrier of meaning. Today, the metaphor
is career as a cart or car that carries the person into uncharted territory.
Accordingly, career construction theory views career as a story that individuals tell about their working life, not progress down a path or up a
ladder. Without the support of an ‘‘organizational career,’’ individuals must
construct an individual career that ﬁts their own lives (Beck, 1994). Whereas
each person experiences an objective career or path, although not linear and
predictable, individuals must construct a subjective career with which to
impose meaning and direction on their vocational behavior. Constructing
a subjective career resembles the task of making a self. A subjective career
emerges from thought or mental activity that constructs a story about one’s
working life. It is this subjective career story that steers and carries individuals across job changes and occupational transitions. Thus, career construct
theory concentrates on composing and using a career narrative about the
self as actor, agent, and author.

Career Construction Theory and Practice

151

FOUNDATIONS OF CAREER CONSTRUCTION:
ACTOR, AGENT, AUTHOR
Career construction theory asserts that individuals, through their actions
in the family, compose a social role as an actor, then adapt this role for
use in the theaters of the school and community, and eventually author an
autobiographical story that explains the continuity and coherence in occupational experiences. This progression applies McAdams and Olson’s (2010)
observation that psychological individuality is rooted in three developmental layers of acting, agency, and authoring. Accordingly, career construction
theory attends to an individual’s behaviors as an actor, strivings as an agent,
and explanations as an author. The objective perspective on the actor delineates a story about the sequence of positions occupied from school through
retirement. The subjective perspective on the agent focuses attention on
the strivings and adaptations pursued by the occupational plot. The projective perspective on the author examines the autobiographical reﬂexivity
(i.e., individuals’ reﬂections on their own life stories) that patterns work
experiences into a meaningful career story. Following this developmental
progression, career construction theory begins with actors and their selfconstruction. It then discusses the two metacompetencies that individuals
need for career construction in the 21st century, namely, adaptability and
identity (Hall & Mirvis, 1995).
Self as Actor: Coconstructing Reputation and Person Types
Beginning in infancy when they enter the family drama, individuals perform as social actors. Toddlers quickly come to understand the world of the
family and also absorb the cultural discourses that surround it. They use
their biological endowments and the identity categories presented to them
(e.g., gender, race, class, and birth order) to carefully make their places in the
family drama. In conjunction with their families and social interactions, individuals craft characters or reputations and then elaborate these distinctive
characteristics in the neighborhood and school. The base of the character arc
coconstructed in the family of origin will, in due course, help to shape the
individual’s career theme. The notion of character arc denotes those aspects
of a life theme that portray where an individual started, is now, and wants
to end up on some essential internal issue.
Introjecting guides and incorporating models. Actors form a character by internalizing the family drama and social world that they experience. An actor
constructs a self in an environment of other people, modeling self upon
objects in the world, beginning with one’s parents. Career construction

152

Career Development and Counseling

theory concentrates on two main methods of internalizing models for the
self, namely, introjection of guides and incorporation of models. Parents or
other familial guides are internalized as introjects or whole objects. Thus,
a guide exists in one’s inner life as a full representation of the parent, as
well as the child’s relationship with the guide. The child may easily engage
in dialogues with the guides she or he has internalized. All children then
must ﬁnd ways to meet the needs, seek the goals, and resolve the conﬂicts
that they have introjected into their own characters. To make a self that may
pursue their goals and solve their problems in growing up, children begin
to elaborate the introjected self-structure to accommodate their unique place
in the family and then the community.
To resolve problems, troubles, and conﬂicts that they encounter within
their families and with their guides, children look to role models who
have solved the same problems in growing up that actors themselves now
face. As children, we select role models who portray tentative solutions
to our main problems and dominant preoccupations. Role models provide
imaginative resources that we ﬁrst use as children and later as adolescents
and adults to inform and shape our identities. Acting as architects of the self,
children select role models as their blueprints for self-design. Heroes model
a way forward in which children may make lives for themselves by dealing
constructively with their problems, preoccupations, and predicaments. We
take meaning from our models to make sense of our own lives. We then
build a self by adopting and rehearsing the models’ characteristics until
those characteristics become our own.
In contrast to the inﬂuence of introjected guides, role models are incorporated identiﬁcations. Incorporation of models is the second core process
of self-construction. Although we take in inﬂuential guides, they are never
accepted as our own choices because we were born to or adopted by those
guides. In comparison, we consciously select role models, and in this sense,
they represent the ﬁrst choice we make in constructing our careers. Thus,
the choice of role models is indeed a decision about self-construction and
the character one prefers to enact in life’s drama. Through the incorporation
processes of identiﬁcation and imitation, children shape the self to resemble
the model, yet the role model remains external, unlike a guide who becomes
an inner other. In a sense, children take in guides yet take on some characteristics of models with whom they identify. Identiﬁcation, or the process of
producing sameness with some model, occurs as the self incorporates, as a
rather permanent part of itself, characteristics of the model.
Reputation. Role-playing, or imitating the model in fantasy and play, mobilizes interests and activities that through repetition and rehearsal develop
skills, abilities, and habits. Rehearsing these traits in activities such as

Career Construction Theory and Practice

153

household chores, games, hobbies, reading, and studying develops the
conﬁdence to address problems in growing up. As these behaviors become
increasingly consistent across activities and stable over time, other people come to recognize them as the child’s ‘‘personality.’’ Thus children
develop reputations in their families, neighborhoods, and schools. The term
personality connotes the view of psychological essentialism that traits compose an identity-determining underlying essence (Rangel & Keller, 2011).
Therefore, belief in context-independent essences that reside inside people
implies a high cross-situational and temporal stability of traits and behaviors
that may be measured with personality and interest inventories.
In contrast to personality as an essence located in the person, career construction theory views reputation as residing in the person’s social network
(Craig, 2009). Reputation is speciﬁc to the unique network of people with
whom individuals interact. Their reputation, or trait ascription, will eventually be located in the network of coworkers in their occupations. According
to Hogan (1983), the primary function of reputation or trait ascription ‘‘is to
evaluate other people, speciﬁcally, to evaluate their potential as resources for
the group’’ (p. 60). Thus, in a group that divides labor among its members,
reputation may be used to assign individuals to work roles. For example,
according to person–environment ﬁt theory, a conscientious person should
make a better banker than a creative person.
Family and friends recognize and discuss personalities by using the cultural categories and folk concepts available to them to distinguish and
describe an individual. According to theories of person perception, individuals think of other people in terms of person types that consist of a cluster
of causally interconnected traits (Sedikides & Anderson, 1994). These traits
seem to have causal connections. For example, someone who is fearful and
hesitant to approach other people may be assumed to be shy, and because
they are shy, they may be lonely. These person types are implicit social
categories that the lay public uses in person perception.
Person types as social categories. In a similar fashion, vocational psychologists
and career counselors recognize and discuss personalities by using the categories provided to them by their professions. Rather than implicit person
types or social categories, they use explicitly tested person types. Holland
and his associates systematically and empirically deﬁned six personality
types with a cluster of connected traits, interests, and values. Holland’s
(1997) RIASEC model, composed of trait complexes organized into types,
offers a useful approach for describing and discussing individual actors, as
well as a company of actors who populate an occupational group. Formulating these person types or prototypes was a major advance in the science

154

Career Development and Counseling

of vocational behavior because the operationally deﬁned explicit RIASEC
types replaced the ill-deﬁned implicit types used previously by counselors
and researchers. Today, the dominant language or professional jargon for
denoting personality or reputation in career studies is that of Holland’s
(1997) making. His RIASEC prototypes provide a readily comprehensible
and broadband tool for organizing vocational phenomena into prototypical
categories (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume).
The types or trait complexes, although decontextualized and abstract, provide extremely useful comparative dimensions for conducting vocational
appraisals of individuals and environments. RIASEC types—including skills,
interests, values, and abilities—can be used to summarize an actor’s reputation as it relates to work roles. This RIASEC vocabulary enables researchers
and counselors to be more efﬁcient and effective in thinking about individuals and the work world, as well as more articulate in communicating their
thoughts to each other and to clients. These advantages hold especially true
if researchers and counselors understand that the RIASEC language both
constructs and constitutes social realities; it does not label preexisting phenomena that have been discovered. Therefore, career construction theory
enjoins vocational psychologists and career counselors not to believe the
reiﬁcation fallacy by treating linguistic abstractions as if they were a real
thing. In career construction theory, RIASEC types are simply resemblances
to socially constructed clusters of attitudes and skills; they have no reality or
truth value outside themselves. The RIASEC hexagon represents regulated
similarities in environments that produce reputational patterns of six types
among individuals with heterogeneous potentials.
Self-constructing types. Career construction theory values the RIASEC taxonomy as a remarkable achievement by Holland. Accordingly, it retains
the RIASEC language to discuss resemblance to types and the processes
of self-making that construct a self-system (Mischel & Morf, 2003). Traditionally, RIASEC personality types are deﬁned by their content, including
interests, competencies, and values, rather than by self-constructing processes. Nevertheless, Holland (1997) suggested that RIASEC types may also
be viewed as processes shaped by schemas, strategies, and beliefs. Each
RIASEC type represents different sets of goals and self-theories. It is a small
step to consider RIASEC types as self-constructing types. Relative to this
reconceptualization of personality, Mischel and Morf (2003) asserted: ‘‘To
the degree that individuals share similar goals, interpersonal competencies, and processing dynamics in the self-construction process, they can be
studied together as constituting particular self-constructing types’’ (p. 32).
So, while recognizing the usefulness of viewing RIASEC types as personal

Career Construction Theory and Practice

155

styles, career construction theory prefers to view them as self-constructing
strategies. These strategies are internalized from interpersonal experiences
and cultural discourses; that is, they are coconstructed by an individual
and society.
Accordingly, this coconstruction perspective asserts that a self is built
from the outside in, not from the inside out as personality trait theorists
would have it. As Vygotsky (1978) noted, ‘‘There is nothing in mind that is
not ﬁrst of all in society’’ (p. 142). In this regard, Holland (1997) theorized
that RIASEC types develop through a child’s preferred activities, which in
turn lead to long-term interests and competencies. Holland (1997) wrote
that ‘‘the order of development usually is from activities to dispositions’’
(p. 19). Holland’s hypothesis is certainly compatible with Leontiev’s (1983)
theorem that the self and other psychological processes originate in activity.
For Leontiev, the act is the beginning of self, and the self is a crystallization of activities. As children grow as actors, they develop an internal
sense of agency.
Self as Agent: Adapting to Tasks, Transitions, and Traumas
With the development of an internal sense of agency in middle childhood,
a second layer of the self begins to take shape (McAdams & Olson, 2010).
Having adapted to the family of origin by becoming a recognizable actor
in the family drama, the individual must, through agency, extend the self
into the community and school. This self-extension requires a formulation
of goals to strive for, then projects, and eventually a career. As children
progress through grade school, they begin to form goals that serve to direct
their adaptation. From this perspective, actors can now also be viewed
as self-regulating agents who pursue goals of their own choosing. Career
construction theory concentrates on this agency when the self must adapt
to transitions. Agency becomes critical when the occupational plot is lost,
ruptured, halted, stalled, or silenced. Because agency deals with the processes of resuming movement, it usually is revealed and discussed in the
language of action verbs, rather than in the language of nouns used to
characterize an actor.
Agency deals with movement into and out of educational and vocational
positions, each of which provides a mechanism of social integration. Our
goals direct our occupational choices as a preferred strategy for sustaining
ourselves in society. In choosing an occupation and participating in a social
niche, the actor manifests the self. Super (1963) explained that in expressing
occupational preferences, individuals put into occupational terminology
their ideas of the kind of people they are; that in entering an occupation, they
seek to implement a concept of themselves; and that after stabilizing in an

156

Career Development and Counseling

occupation, they seek to realize their potential and preserve self-esteem. At
some point, and usually at repeated points, most of us change occupational
positions. The move from one position to another is a period of transition
during which a person must leave one place, revise goals, choose another
place, and enter and establish herself or himself in that unfamiliar space.
Adaptation and developmental tasks. The process of adapting to changing
conditions prompts a period of heightened learning and development for
the person on the move. Although change fosters personal development,
people do not readily initiate large changes themselves because they have
grown comfortable where they are and transitions require substantial effort.
More often than not, some external event initiates their movement. Career
construction theory identiﬁes three major social challenges that prompt
change: vocational development tasks, occupational transitions, and work
traumas. Vocational development tasks communicate social expectations
about age-graded normative transitions. Societies synchronize adolescents
and emerging adults to their culture by telling them in advance how
to prepare for and enter their work lives. Thus, vocational development
tasks provide powerful anticipations with which young people can envision
and prepare for occupations congruent with their abilities and interests.
Simply stated, the major developmental tasks require that young people, in
turn, view work as a salient role, crystallize preferences for vocational ﬁelds
and levels, specify occupational preferences, enter a ﬁtting job, and progress
in that job until moving to the next job. The movement from one job to
the next job is called an occupational transition. These transitions may be
wanted or unwanted, planned or unexpected, and promotions or demotions.
Work traumas, of course, are unpredictable and unwanted. Traumas include
painful events such as plant closings, industrial accidents, occupational
injuries, and contract violations.
Career construction theory views adapting to these tasks, transitions,
and traumas as fostered principally by ﬁve sets of behaviors, each named
for their adaptive functions: orientation, exploration, establishment, management, and disengagement. These constructive activities form a cycle of
adaptive performance that is periodically repeated as an individual must
ﬁt into a changing context. Realizing that a new adaptation approaches,
individuals can adapt more effectively if they meet changing conditions
with growing awareness and information seeking, followed by informed
decision making, trial behaviors leading to a stable commitment projected
forward for a certain time period, active role management, and eventually
forward-looking disengagement. Recycling or reengaging in behaviors associated with the adaptive functions of orientation, exploration, stabilization,

Career Construction Theory and Practice

157

management, and disengagement occurs much more frequently in postindustrial economies in which people change jobs about every 5 years (Mullins,
2009). This differs from life in industrial economies, in which people may
work 30 years at the same job. Rather than develop biographical certainty about an orderly sequence of tasks in a predictable life course,
people now must adapt to an individualized life course (Beck, 1994) with
destandardized trajectories consisting of more frequent and less predictable
occupational transitions.
Adaptation: readiness, resources, responses, and results. The word adapt comes
from the Latin, meaning ‘‘to ﬁt.’’ It means bringing inner needs and outer
opportunities into harmony, with the harmonics of a good adaptation indicated by success, satisfaction, and well-being. Career construction theory
characterizes adaptation outcomes as resulting from adaptivity, adaptability,
and adapting. These words denote a sequence ranging across adaptive readiness, adaptability resources, adapting responses, and adaptation results.
People are more or less prepared to change, differ in their resources to
manage change, demonstrate more or less change when change is needed,
and as a result, become more or less integrated into life roles over time.
Adaptivity and readiness. In career construction theory, adaptivity denotes the
personal characteristic of ﬂexibility or willingness to meet career tasks, transitions, and traumas with ﬁtting responses. We reach the threshold to initiate
the interpersonal and intrapersonal processes that guide goal-directed activity when we can no longer assimilate the changes and persevere in routine
activities. At that point, we need to accommodate to the disequilibrium by
changing the self or circumstances. The required accommodations typically
prompt feelings of distress that fuel motivation and bolster the willingness
to adapt. However, adaptiveness by itself is insufﬁcient to support adaptive
behaviors. Individuals willing to adapt must bring self-regulation resources
to bear on changing the situation—what career construction theory calls
adaptabilities.
Adaptability and resources. Career adaptability denotes an individual’s psychosocial resources for coping with current and anticipated vocational
development tasks, occupational transitions, and work traumas that, to some
degree large or small, alter their social integration (Savickas, 1997). Individuals draw on these self-regulation resources to solve the unfamiliar, complex,
and ill-deﬁned problems presented by the tasks, transitions, and traumas.
These resources are considered psychosocial because they reside at the intersection of person-in-environment. Adaptability shapes self-extension into

158

Career Development and Counseling

the social environment as individuals connect with society and regulate
their own vocational behavior.
As seen in Table 6.1, career construction theory deﬁnes four global dimensions of career adaptability and organizes them into a structural model with
three levels. At the highest and most abstract level are the four dimensions of
career adaptability: concern, control, curiosity, and conﬁdence. These dimensions represent general adaptability resources and strategies that individuals
use to manage critical tasks, transitions, and traumas as they construct their
careers. At the intermediate level, the model articulates a distinct set of
functionally homogeneous variables for each of the four general dimensions.
Each set of intermediate variables includes the speciﬁc attitudes, beliefs, and
competencies—the ABCs of career construction—that shape the concrete
adapting behaviors used to master developmental tasks, negotiate occupational transitions, and resolve work traumas. Attitudes are affective variables
or feelings that fuel behavior, whereas beliefs are conative variables or inclinations that direct behavior. The attitudes and beliefs dispose individuals to
act in certain ways, and thus they form dispositional response tendencies.
The competencies, including comprehension and problem-solving abilities,
denote the cognitive resources brought to bear on making and implementing
career choices.
Dispositional attitudes and beliefs shape the development and use of the
competencies. In turn, the cognitive competencies shape the adapting behaviors that actually produce vocational development and construct careers.
These coping behaviors constitute the third and most concrete level in the

Table 6.1
Career Adaptability Dimensions
Adaptability
Dimension

Attitudes and
Beliefs

Competence

Concern

Planful

Planning

Control

Decisive

Decision making

Curiosity

Inquisitive

Exploring

Conﬁdence

Efﬁcacious

Problem solving

Coping
Behaviors
Aware
Involved
Preparing
Assertive
Disciplined
Willful
Experimenting
Risk taking
Inquiring
Persistent
Striving
Industrious

Career Problem
Indifference

Indecision

Unrealism

Inhibition

Career Construction Theory and Practice

159

structural model of career adaptability. Representative behaviors for each
dimension appear in Table 6.1. These coping behaviors, along with others,
compose the adaptive functions of orientation, exploration, establishment,
maintenance, and disengagement. The ﬁnal column in Table 6.1 lists the
likely career problem linked to a deﬁcit in each of the adaptability resources.
Having outlined the structural model of career adaptabilities, let us turn
to a detailed explanation of the four dimensions of coping resources. Career
construction theory conceptualizes resourceful individuals as (a) becoming
concerned about their future as a worker, (b) increasing personal control over
their vocational future, (c) displaying curiosity in exploring possible selves
and future scenarios, and (d) strengthening the conﬁdence to pursue their
aspirations. Career adaptability thus increases along the four dimensions of
concern, control, curiosity, and conﬁdence.
Career concern. Concern about one’s own vocational future is the ﬁrst and
most important dimension of career adaptability. The fundamental function
of career concern in constructing careers is reﬂected by the prime place
given to it by prominent theories of vocational development, denoted by
names such as Ginzberg’s time perspective, Super’s planfulness, Tiedeman’s
anticipation, Crites’s orientation, and Harren’s awareness (Savickas, Silling, &
Schwartz, 1984). Career concern means essentially a future orientation, a
sense that it is important to prepare for tomorrow. Attitudes of planfulness
and optimism foster preparedness because they dispose individuals to
become aware of the vocational tasks and occupational transitions to be
faced and choices to be made in the imminent and distant future. Thinking
about one’s work life across time is the essence of career because a subjective
career is not a behavior; it is an idea. Career construction is fostered by
ﬁrst realizing that one’s present vocational situation evolved from past
experiences and then connecting these experiences through the present
situation to a preferred future. A belief in the continuity of experience
allows individuals to connect their present activities to their occupational
aspirations and visions of possible selves. This sense of continuity allows
individuals to envision how today’s effort builds tomorrow’s success. Planful
attitudes and belief in continuity incline individuals to engage in activities
and experiences that promote competencies in planning and preparing for
the future. A lack of career concern is called career indifference, which reﬂects
apathy, pessimism, and planlessness.
Career control. Control over one’s own vocational future is the second most
important dimension in career adaptability. The fundamental function of
control in constructing careers is reﬂected by the vast amount of research

160

Career Development and Counseling

on topics such as independence, internal locus of control, autonomy, selfdetermination, effort attributions, and agency (Blustein & Flum, 1999). The
dominant culture in the United States, and in those who have assimilated
it, leans toward independence in balancing self and society. Consequently,
the most popular models and materials for career intervention assume that
an individual independently makes career choices. Independence as an
interpersonal variable is not part of career construction theory. Career construction theory explicitly acknowledges that, in relation to individualistic
and collectivistic contexts, either interdependence or independence may be
adaptive. Nevertheless, self-control is important in both contexts.
Career construction theory conceptualizes control as an aspect of intrapersonal processes that foster self-regulation, not interpersonal processes
that impact self-regulation (Fitzsimons & Finkel, 2010). Control involves
intrapersonal self-discipline and the processes of being conscientious, deliberate, organized, and decisive in performing vocational development tasks
and making occupational transitions. Its opposite is confusion, not dependence. Control disposes individuals to engage the vocational development
tasks and negotiate occupational transitions, rather than avoid them. Individuals who encounter a narrower range of options, for whatever reasons,
exercise career control by exploring the limited number of possibilities to
make them personally meaningful and by ﬁne-tuning available choices to
enact them uniquely. Conscientious attitudes and belief in personal responsibility incline individuals to intentionally direct vocational actions. A lack
of career control is often called career indecision and enacted as confusion,
procrastination, or impulsivity.
Career curiosity. From a sense of self-control emerges the initiative to learn
about the types of work that one might want to do and the occupational
opportunities to do it. The fundamental function of curiosity in constructing
careers is reﬂected by the extensive coverage given to it by prominent theories
of vocational development under the rubrics of exploration and informationseeking behavior, as well as in their direct products of self-knowledge and
occupational information. Career curiosity refers to inquisitiveness about
and exploration of the ﬁt between oneself and the work world. When acted
upon, curiosity produces a fund of knowledge with which to make choices
that ﬁt self to situation. Systematic exploration and reﬂection on random
exploratory experiences move individuals from naive to knowledgeable as
they learn how the world works.
Attitudes of inquisitiveness dispose individuals to scan the environment
to learn more about self and situations. Belief in the value of being open to
new experiences and experimenting with possible selves and various roles

Career Construction Theory and Practice

161

prompts individuals to try new things and have adventures. Attitudes and
dispositions that favor exploration and openness lead to experiences that
increase competence in both self-knowledge and occupational information.
Individuals who have explored the world beyond their own neighborhoods
have more knowledge about their abilities, interests, and values, as well as
about the requirements, routines, and rewards of various occupations. This
broader fund of information brings realism and objectivity to subsequent
choices that will match self to situations. A lack of career curiosity can lead
to unrealism about the work world and inaccurate images of the self.
Career conﬁdence. Individuals need conﬁdence to act on their interests. Selfconﬁdence denotes the anticipation of success in encountering challenges
and overcoming obstacles (Rosenberg, 1989). In career construction theory,
conﬁdence denotes feelings of self-efﬁcacy concerning one’s ability to successfully execute a course of action needed to make and implement suitable
educational and vocational choices. Career choices require solving complex problems. The fundamental role of conﬁdence in constructing careers
is reﬂected in the extensive scholarship on self-esteem, self-efﬁcacy, and
encouragement in theories of vocational development. Career conﬁdence
arises from solving problems encountered in daily activities, such as household chores, schoolwork, and hobbies. Moreover, recognizing that one can
be useful and productive at these tasks increases feelings of self-acceptance.
Broader exploratory experiences reinforce the conﬁdence to try more things.
Individuals who have been sheltered or excluded from certain categories
of experience (e.g., math and science) ﬁnd it difﬁcult to be conﬁdent in
approaching those activities and consequently will be less interested in occupations that require skill at those activities. Mistaken beliefs about gender,
race, and social roles often produce internal and external barriers that inhibit
the development of conﬁdence.
A lack of career conﬁdence can result in career inhibition that thwarts
actualizing roles and achieving goals.
Proﬁles of career adaptability. In theory, individuals should approach tasks,
transitions, and trauma with a concern for the future, a sense of control over
it, the curiosity to experiment with possible selves and explore social opportunities, and the conﬁdence to engage in designing their occupational future
and executing plans to adapt. In reality, development along the four dimensions of adaptability progresses at different rates, with possible ﬁxations
and regressions. Delays within or disequilibrium between the four developmental lines produces problems in crystallizing career preferences and
specifying occupational choices, problems that career counselors diagnose

162

Career Development and Counseling

as indifference, indecision, unrealism, and inhibition. Moderate disharmony
in the development of the four dimensions of adaptability produces variant
patterns of development. Strong disharmony produces deviant patterns of
development. Accordingly, comparing development among the four dimensions is a useful way to understand the antecedents of difﬁculties in adapting
to tasks, transitions, and traumas. Individual differences in the adaptability
resources for making and implementing choices may be measured in students with the Career Maturity Inventory-Adaptability Form (Savickas &
Porfeli, 2012) and in adults with the Career Adapt-Abilities Scale (Porfeli &
Savickas, 2012).
Interplay among adaptiveness, adaptability, adapting, and adaptation. Better outcomes (adaptation results) are achieved by individuals who are willing
(adaptive readiness) and able (adaptability resources) to perform coping behaviors that address changing conditions (adapting responses). An
analogy to airline travel may sharpen the distinctions between readiness,
resources, responses, and results. In preparing to depart, ﬂight attendants
ask passengers seated in an exit row whether they are ‘‘willing and able’’ to
assist in an emergency. Some people may be willing yet unable; other people
may be unwilling yet able. In the language of career construction theory, the
attendant is asking the passengers whether they have the willingness and
resources that may be needed to act in an emergency. Career construction
theory views ‘‘willing and able’’ as ‘‘adaptivity and adaptability’’ or as
‘‘readiness and resources.’’ To continue the analogy, the airplane emergency
might require some lifesaving actions. In career construction, this adapting
or ‘‘doing’’ involves the behaviors that function to accomplish orientation,
exploration, establishment, management, and disengagement. The adapting,
in turn, leads to some outcome or adaptation that is judged for its goodness
of ﬁt as indicated by success and satisfaction.
Adaptation and goals. The process of adaptation is facilitated and directed
by a person’s goals. In general, the goal is to harmonize inner needs with
outer opportunities. In particular, speciﬁc inner needs direct one to seek
certain goals. Goals are representations of future states that satisfy needs
and promise a sense of security (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960). Goals
represent what people want and what they want to avoid. Because clear
goals give direction and continuity to behavior, they support the intensiﬁed
self-regulation needed during periods of transition (Heckhausen, Wrosch, &
Schulz, 2010).
Career construction theory views goals as arising from what an individual
needs to feel secure. Interests connect personal needs and relevant goals.

Career Construction Theory and Practice

163

From Latin, inter est means ‘‘to be between.’’ Interests are psychosocial
tensional states between an individual’s needs and social opportunities to
fulﬁll those needs. The individual looks for interesting objects and activities in
the environment that will be useful in meeting goals. The attraction or interest
follows from actors evaluating the object of attention as useful in becoming
more whole or complete. They believe that engaging in the interesting activity
will address the preoccupations and problems that they carry forward from
their family of origin and will further their self-construction. People also
are attracted to join social environments populated by individuals they
resemble. The matching of a person to an occupational group or vocational
prototype makes interest inventories possible. However, remember that
career construction theory views interests not as essential traits, but as
coconstructed beliefs that particular activities or objects may be useful to
the actor in furthering self-construction and social adaptation. Of course,
many people cannot pursue interests that lead to their goals and meet their
need for self-realization. They must take the only employment available to
them. This uninteresting work at least fosters adaptation as survival, if not
adaptation as self-realization. These individuals must continue to use leisure
pursuits to construct and substantiate a self.
Self as Author: Narrating a Career Story
During the elementary school years and into adolescence, the agentic actor
portrays a complex amalgam of inﬂuences and identiﬁcations. When individuals reach late adolescence, society expects them to ‘‘get a life’’ (Habermas &
Bluck, 2000), that is, integrate their actions and agency into a unique identity
supported by a uniﬁed life story. As individuals learn more about themselves as actors and motivated agents, they become ready to pattern their
constellation of goals and purposive projects into a coherent and credible
story. This identity narrative is not a summing up but a synthesis (Erikson,
1968), a conﬁguration that reconciles multiple abstractions to produce an
integrative solution to the problems in making the transition from school to
work and from adolescence to adulthood. The identity narrative expresses
the uniqueness of an individual in her or his particular context by articulating
goals, directing adaptive behavior, and imposing meaning on activities. The
individual uses this self-sustaining narrative to evaluate career opportunities
and negotiate social constraints.
Identity narratives. As Erikson (1968) noted, career is a central story line in an
identity narrative. The essential meaning of career and the dynamics of its
construction are revealed in self-deﬁning stories about the tasks, transitions,

164

Career Development and Counseling

and traumas that an individual has faced. In career stories that chronicle the
recursive interplay between self and society, the actor tells what happened
in a job resume, the agent explains why it happened in an occupational plot,
and the author interprets what it means with a career theme.
To compose an identity narrative and career story, authors must select and
organize incidents and episodes from the micronarratives. At its simplest,
the macronarrative sequences occupational positions in a chronological
resume. The progression of positions that an individual occupies is an
objective career, one publicly observable and documented. Fundamentally,
this arrangement of jobs into sequence is a story, yet it is a story without a
plot or theme. E. M. Forster (1927) once exempliﬁed the difference between a
story and plot this way: ‘‘The King died and then the Queen died’’ is a story
because it has a sequence. ‘‘The King died, and then the Queen died of grief’’
adds plot to the story by explaining the action. Emplotment arranges the
separate small stories in a sequence directed toward a conclusion (Ricoeur,
1984). It explains why things happened by raising some facts to prominence
and adding connections within the occupational sequence. Emplotment
also conﬁgures the diverse incidents and different episodes into a partwhole structure in which the parts gather meaning in relation to the whole.
Emplotment produces a higher-level narrative that incorporates the small
stories to illustrate and corroborate the larger grand story of a life.
An occupational plot makes connections that transform the job sequence
in the objective career into a subjective career. However, occupational plots
explain why an individual changed positions without reference to personal
meaning. Plots portray the self as agent, not author. Authoring deeper, private meaning to accompany the public explanation of plot requires a theme.
An occupational plot’s implicit theme becomes more explicit through its repetition in the accumulating microstories. Cumulating incidents and insights
into an abstract theme thickens the plot and ampliﬁes larger meanings. A
sense of unity crystallizes as the career theme imposes meaning on the plot
parts through their participation in the whole. Autobiographical reasoning
seeks to craft some thematic unity, not uniformity, out of contradictory
beliefs and bafﬂing behaviors. This unity must be achieved in a properly
complicated way that integrates diversity without homogenizing it. Once
articulated and authenticated, the career theme provides a unifying idea
that, through recurrence, makes a life whole.
The thematic pattern woven by this central idea provides the primary unit
of meaning used to understand the facts of a job story and the explanations
of the occupational plot. The repeating pattern in a life reveals people to
themselves and others. As individuals incorporate new experiences, they
use the career theme to impose a pattern of meaning that comprehends the
new episodes in the occupational plot. When the plot ruptures, individuals

Career Construction Theory and Practice

165

use the recurrent pattern in the macronarrative theme to restore order and
direct action.
Career theme. A career theme brings more than unity to a plot; it brings
continuity because it traces how a person remains identical with self despite
diversity across micronarratives. Even when everything seems to change,
the theme remains the same. Recall that in constructing a narrative identity,
individuals work out the problem of their sameness across time. A theme
grounds the here and now in the there and then. In telling how the self of
yesterday became the self of today and will become the self of tomorrow
(McAdams & Olson, 2010), an author’s identity narrative supports both a
stable actor with a continuous story and a ﬂexible agent capable of change.
The theme keeps the narrative going by continually integrating events and
pulling them into the plot (Giddens, 1991).
In career construction theory, the theme is what matters in the life story. It
consists of what is at stake in that person’s life, and it brings a perspective to
bear on experiences. The theme, clear or complicated, carries to work settings
the concerns that constitute the individual and matter most in deﬁning self
and expressing identity. A theme articulates a purposive attitude toward
life and states the idea that the life serves. The thematic purpose pursued
in the occupational plot makes work the outer form of something intensely
personal. This can be made clear for a particular person by personalizing
the following mapping sentence: ‘‘I will become (actor’s reputation) so that
I can (agent’s goal), and in the process (author’s theme).’’ For example, one
medical student’s mapping sentence was ‘‘I will become a psychiatrist so
that I may heal families in crisis and in the process reduce my own feelings of
helplessness about my own family’s suffering.’’ Compare this to a classmate’s
statement of ‘‘I will become a neurosurgeon so that I may perform delicate
operations and in the process prove to my father than I am not clumsy.’’ The
public meaning in these two statements indicates the social contribution and
occupational niche; the private meaning expresses a career theme. Integrative
choices allow individuals to actively master what they passively suffered
as they turn private preoccupations into public occupations. Readers might
complete their own mapping sentence, ‘‘I am becoming a counselor to help
people (do what), so that I (personal meaning).’’ For example, one counselor
stated that ‘‘I became a counselor to do for others what I wish had been done
for me when I was hurting.’’
Character arc. As a carrier of meaning, themes hold the character arc or
overarching narrative thread that extends through the entire macronarrative.
The character arc portrays where the individual started, is now, and wants

166

Career Development and Counseling

to end up on some essential issue. Character begins with an impetus in
the family ground that molds and moves the actor. Often stories start with
something missing in life, something that individuals need or for which
they long. To overcome this limitation, deﬁciency, or weakness, they seek to
attain goals that fulﬁll the need. They try to ﬁx the ﬂaw at the base of their
character arc. As they move from tension to intention, they wrestle with the
fear, limitation, block, or wound. In due course, they learn how to overcome
the adversity and transform their symptoms into strengths.
The progress from need to goal transforms individuals as they forge a
character that addresses their preoccupations and solves their problems.
This transformation from tragedy to triumph represents the core of the
character, that is, the character arc that deﬁnes the person and explains the
driving force of the plot. Consider, for example, the following ﬁve familiar
character arcs: the sickly child who becomes a champion bodybuilder,
the stuttering child who becomes a network news anchor, the shy child
who becomes an actor, the poor child who grows up to be wealthy, and
the cowardly child who becomes a brave ﬁghter. These well-known arcs
express cultural scripts that tell how an individual moves from weakness
to strength, timidity to conﬁdence, inhibition to expressiveness, poverty to
afﬂuence, and fear to fortitude. Applying to practice the perspectives of actor,
agent, and author structures an improved scheme for career intervention
(Savickas, 1996).
Career Interventions for Actors, Agents, and Authors
From the three perspectives on the self as described by career construction
theory, three main career interventions assist people to choose and adjust
to their work roles. The career services or interventions are vocational guidance for the actor, career education or coaching for the agent, and career
counseling for the author (Savickas, 2012). Depending on a client’s needs,
practitioners may apply vocational guidance to identify occupational ﬁt,
career education to foster vocational development and preparedness, or
career counseling to shape a vocational identity and design a life. Guidance, education, and counseling are each rooted in a particular paradigm
or general pattern of practice, accompanied by their own models, methods, and materials. Kuhn (1996) described a paradigm as a conceptual
model with a set of prevailing practices that deﬁne a discipline during a
certain period of time. The following paragraphs outline fundamental differences among guidance, education, and counseling as distinct paradigms for
career intervention.
Vocational guidance meets the needs of individuals moving to cities to
work in industrial factories. From the objective perspective of individual

Career Construction Theory and Practice

167

differences, guidance views clients as actors who may be characterized by
scores on traits and who may be matched to occupations that employ people
they resemble. The same principles are applied in academic advising to guide
students to ﬁtting educational and training niches, to select personnel for
an organization, and to classify armed forces recruits into military positions.
The general paradigm for vocational guidance and educational advising
is to (a) increase self-knowledge, (b) gather occupational information, and
(c) match self to ﬁtting occupations or academic majors. The desired outcome
is entering a congruent position leading to success, satisfaction, and stability.
Readers interested in learning more about vocational guidance may consult
Holland (1997) or Lofquist and Dawis (1991) (also see Chapters 2 and 3 of
this volume).
Career education and coaching meets the needs of individuals climbing the
corporate ladder of high modernity. From the subjective perspective of
individual development, education views clients as agents who may be
characterized by their degree of readiness to engage developmental tasks
appropriate to their career stages and who may be helped to implement
new attitudes, beliefs, and competencies that further their careers. When
performed with adults, career education typically is called career coaching.
The general paradigm for career education and coaching is to (a) assess
developmental status, (b) orient to imminent developmental tasks and occupational transitions, and (c) increase preparedness with relevant coping
attitudes, beliefs, and competencies. The outcome for career education and
coaching is enhanced adaptability, sometimes called career choice readiness
or work adjustment. Those interested in learning more about career education may review career development and assessment counseling (Super,
1983; Chapter 4, this volume) and the social-cognitive framework for career
choice and counseling (Brown & Lent, 1996; Chapter 5, this volume).
Career counseling meets the needs of individuals preparing for and participating in the new world of work forged by the digital revolution and global
economy (Savickas, 2012). From the project perspective of individual design,
counseling views clients as authors who construct their careers by telling
autobiographical stories and reﬂecting on themes that specify their uniqueness. The general paradigm or pattern of practice for career counseling and
life designing is (a) construct and deconstruct a career story, (b) reconstruct
an occupational plot and career theme, and (c) coconstruct the next episode
in the story. The outcome for career designing is an enhanced sense of
identity and meaningful vocational action.
The work of guidance entails thinking in terms of resemblance to types
and making matches. The work of counseling involves thinking in terms
of uniqueness and making meaning. Career counseling does not replace
vocational guidance. Rather, career counseling takes its place among the

168

Career Development and Counseling

interventions of vocational guidance and career education. Of course, today
guidance usually includes some element of career education and career
counseling as it addresses questions of choice and adjustment. Nevertheless,
the dominant nomothetic discourse of guidance emphasizes generalizations about individuals’ belongingness and seeks to inform clients, whereas
the dominant idiographic discourse of counseling emphasizes particulars
about individuals’ uniqueness and seeks to transform clients. Each career
intervention—whether guidance, education, or counseling—is valuable and
effective for its intended purpose. As counselors select an intervention for a
particular student or client, they answer an essential question ﬁrst posed by
Williamson and Bordin (1941, p. 8): What method will produce what types
of results with what types of clients? To answer this question, counselors
might consider whether they seek to aid the actor, agent, or author.
A COUNSELING MODEL FOR CAREER CONSTRUCTION
The theory of career construction has been applied to practice in a model for
career counseling. Although crafted to direct counseling with individuals as
authors, counseling for career construction also includes elements to guide
actors in choosing work roles and to prepare agents to adapt to transitions.
Career construction counseling assumes that individuals begin narrative
processing of their biographies (Heinz, 2002) when they are dislocated
from the current episode in their career stories or have lost the plot. Some
individuals seek counseling to assist them in this identity work, especially if
they feel perplexed and confused. The goals of counseling are to have clients
tell vocational stories about their work lives and their current transitions and
troubles, integrate the vocational stories into an identity narrative about self
and work, use that narrative to make meaning of the transition and regulate
emotions, script the next scene in the occupational plot, and prompt action
to construct a more satisfying life.
Practitioners begin career construction counseling by having clients
describe (a) the incident that dislocates them from the current episode
in their story, (b) their adaptive readiness and resources, and (c) their
goals for a new scenario they want to coconstruct with a counselor. After
brieﬂy addressing these three questions and initiating a working alliance,
counselors interview clients using a uniform set of questions. The Career
Construction Interview (CCI; formerly the career style/story interview;
Savickas, 1989, 2011a) has clients tell small stories or micronarratives that
reveal how they have constructed self, identity, and career. Storytelling
makes the self and crystallizes identity. Career construction counseling concentrates on stories because their language and images are the construction
tools that people use to make a self, shape an identity, and build a career.

Career Construction Theory and Practice

169

The English Renaissance poet Ben Jonson wrote, ‘‘Language most shows
a man; speak that I may see thee.’’ Repeated words and resulting themes
are acts of identity through which clients show their selves and search for
social roles.
Construction
Five questions in the CCI elicit vocational stories about the actor, agent,
author, advice, and arc. First, counselors examine how clients have constructed a self as actor by asking about role models. Second, to assess
agentic strivings and goals, counselors ask clients about manifest interests
rather than inventoried interests. Interests manifest themselves in conjunction with such things as favorite magazines, television shows, and Web
sites. Third, counselors ask clients as authors to describe the script of their
current favorite story, whether from a book or a movie. The fourth question
requests a favorite saying because a motto usually advises clients about the
adaptability resources and adapting actions required to move to the next
episode in the occupational plot. The ﬁnal question inquires about character
arc by asking for the earliest recollection (ER) that clients can recall. For most
clients, the ER depicts a negative experience that portrays a motif and central
conﬂict (Chae, Goodman, & Edelstein, 2011). Nevertheless, ERs are more
about the future in that clients select, elaborate, and reconstruct memories
that guide present or future action.
Deconstruction
A client’s outward reach has inner boundaries. As a client’s vocational stories
construct career, the counselor listens for vignettes that require deconstruction. Stories that devitalize a client because of dominating expectations or
insidious ideas must be carefully deconstructed to reveal and defeat their
self-limiting ideas, conﬁning roles, and cultural barriers. Often, the vignettes
that most require deconstruction involve biases regarding gender, race, and
social class. Taking apart these mistaken ideas may open pathways not
previously seen or possible because clients can only make choices given the
world they know.
At the same time, counselors must realize that an individual’s stories do
not determine the future; instead, storying is an active attempt at making
meaning and shaping the future. In telling their stories, individuals are
constructing a possible future. They usually tell themselves the stories
that they themselves need to hear because, from all their available stories,
they narrate those stories that support current goals and inspire action.
Rather than remembering, individuals re-member the past so that prior
events support current choices and lay the groundwork for future moves

170

Career Development and Counseling

(Josselson, 2000). This is an instance, not of the present taking lessons from
the past, but of the past taking lessons from the present, reshaping itself to
ﬁt current needs. This narrative truth may, of course, differ from historical
fact because it ﬁctionalizes the past. In so doing, it preserves continuity
and coherence in the face of change and allows the person to meet that
change with the ﬁdelity of the actor and the ﬂexibility of the agent. Having
listened closely to a client’s vocational stories, and maybe deconstructing
some demoralizing ideas and incidents, it comes time to reconstruct the
small stories into a large story of career.
Reconstruction
Reconstruction and emplotment craft a subjective career from client constructions of their work lives. Narrative processing of vocational stories
identiﬁes and assembles important incidents into a macronarrative, or a
grand story, about the career. The identity narrative tells the story of a
person who becomes a character in a world that she or he has coconstructed
with signiﬁcant others. The portrayal bestows personal meaning and social
mattering on a life as it tells about pattern and progress. Nevertheless, the
portrait does not tell the complete life story; rather, it frames a perspective
and illuminates aspects of lived experience relevant to the questions asked
by the client. To do this, the identity narrative highlights the occupational
plot and career theme in the sequence of vocational stories. The career theme
represents the controlling idea served by the plot. The theme also carries
the character arc, that is, how the person changes over time relative to
preoccupations, puzzlements, and problems. Plot reorganization and theme
reconstruction deepen the identity narrative by infusing feeling and broaden
it by integrating more vocational stories.
In attempting to discern the career theme while listening to clients’ vocational stories, researchers and counselors may become disoriented by the
numerous particulars of a life. To prevent becoming confused by a client’s
complexities and contradictions, counselors listen not to the facts but for
the glue that holds the facts together because it is the theme or secret that
makes a whole of the life. Recognizing the career theme in the seemingly
random actions and incidents explained by an occupational plot can be done
in many ways. Career construction theory proposes for this purpose that
researchers and counselors listen for the quintessence of a client’s vocational
stories. They may approach this task by assuming that the archetypal theme
of career construction involves turning a personal preoccupation into a public occupation. As Csikszentmihalyi and Beattie (1979) explained, ‘‘A life
theme consists of a problem or a set of problems which a person wishes
to solve above everything else and the means the person ﬁnds to achieve

Career Construction Theory and Practice

171

a solution’’ (p. 48). In the work domain, the problem is the preoccupation, and the solution is the occupation. Often, clients’ preoccupations are
unpleasant, involving difﬁculty and distress. Yet, some clients’ preoccupations are pleasant, involving ease and enjoyment. Thus, the word problem
means the content of a preoccupation or puzzlement—whether positive or
negative—that individuals must address in solving themselves.
Career construction revolves around turning a personal problem into a
public strength and then even a social contribution. In counseling for career
construction, the essential activity entails articulating the preoccupation
and discussing possible solutions in the form of jobs that may extend the
occupational plot into the next scene. This often involves helping a client
construct interests (Kitson, 1942). Counselors help clients create interest
by showing them how a few occupations and avocations directly address
their preoccupation and, in so doing, may resolve their problems. The view
that interests originate as solutions to problems is not new. In 1940, Carter
concluded that interests are ‘‘solutions to the problems of growing up’’
(p. 187). Interest, in proposing a path from preoccupation to occupation,
strives to maintain an individual’s integrity by charting strategies for survival, integrative adaptation, and optimal development—the very stuff of
life themes.
Coconstruction
Having reconstructed an identity narrative about career from the vocational
stories, the counselor then presents to a client the draft of her or his
life portrait, including the occupational plot, career theme, and character
arc. As the client engages and emotionally enters the life portrait, the
counselor encourages the client to edit it. This revision involves amendments,
adjustments, and alterations. Clients need to modify the life portrait to make
it more livable and then extend it into the future. This work by the client
is critically important because it is why they came to counseling. Work
by the client rather than by the counselor predicts positive outcomes:
Clients who ﬁnd the words and experience the feelings build a scaffold
for self-construction and meaning-making that supports scripting the next
episode in the occupational plot. Client and counselor join together to
candidly craft moves in meaning with which to confront choices relative
to tasks, transitions, and traumas. The coconstruction of the life portrait
seeks to situate the current dislocation in a way that clariﬁes priorities,
mobilizes central tendencies, and increases the possibility of transformation
and development. This occurs as clients access different meanings and
knowledge that open new possibilities and restart stalled initiatives. The
counselor serves as a witness who validates and authenticates the new story

172

Career Development and Counseling

and its intentions. With their intentions more apparent to themselves and
their counselors, clients are ready to face challenges and disruptions in their
occupational plots, envision the next scene, and begin to act.
Action
People need to make their lives happen. Although scripting the next scene
brings client experience forward, activity starts clients living ahead of themselves. The necessary action is to turn intentions into behavior infused with
meaning (Malrieu, 2003). Client and counselor together craft an action agenda
that will move the client from the currently experienced situation to the one
currently desired. Through action, not verbal expressions of decidedness,
clients engage the world (Krieshok, Black, & McKay, 2009). Going further
and deeper into the world answers the questions brought to counseling.
Action advances self-making, identity shaping, and career constructing.
In sum, counseling for career construction involves having clients construct
their careers by articulating vocational stories, deconstruct demoralizing stories by destabilizing their meanings, reconstruct a life portrait by elaborating
the identity narrative, coconstruct the next episode in the occupational plot
by transforming the tension into intention, and take actions to create a
more satisfying life. Thus, the sequence is articulate, destabilize, elaborate,
transform, and act.
Case Study
Live demonstrations of the career construction counseling model show
the approach in action (Savickas, 2006, 2009). The following case study
demonstrates career constructing by describing the use of this counseling
model to help a client coconstruct a viable and suitable identity narrative
that enables her to make educational and vocational choices and take actions
to lead a more satisfying life.
Meeting Elaine. When the counselor ﬁrst met Elaine, she was a 20-year-old
full-time college student who had just completed the fall semester of her
sophomore year. During the spring semester, she must declare her major.
She could not decide on a major, although her mother urged her to declare
premed. She lived at home and commuted to campus each day. She reported
that she had talked about careers with her college counselor yet then felt even
more undecided. She guessed she would major in premed and then enter
medical school, yet she was unsure about this. She wanted the counselor
to help her explore whether medicine was the right choice for her. She
sometimes thought engineering would be a better choice, and she took

Career Construction Theory and Practice

173

an engineering class during the fall semester. She believed that chemical
engineering might be a good choice, yet civil engineering seemed easier.
She had requested information from another college where they have better
integrated computers into their chemical engineering curriculum. She was
attracted by computers and liked the idea that if she transferred to that
college she could live in a dormitory. In response to the question of how
counseling could be useful to her, Elaine responded that she did not know
why she could not choose an academic major, she needed help in making a
choice, and wondered whether medicine would be the right choice for her.
Career construction interview (ﬁrst session). The genius of the counselor is in
asking questions, not in ﬁnding answers. Clients know the answers, and
the counselor’s questions help clients acknowledge what they know. The
counselor began the story crafting questions of the CCI (Savickas, 2011a)
by inquiring about three role models to learn about Elaine as an actor.
Elaine stated that Anne of Green Gables had spirit and a temper, set goals
and went after them, did what she wanted, had integrity, and had fun.
The heroine in the book A Wrinkle in Time led her friends in a showdown
against creatures trying to take over their minds. She thought of ways to
stick together and ﬁght the creatures. Laura, in the book Little House on the
Prairie, had wild ideas of things to do and enjoyed competing with and
outdoing others. To assess preferred environments and manifest interests,
the counselor asked Elaine about favorite magazines, books, and television
shows. She liked Vogue because it is about fashion, BusinessWeek because it is
about advertising campaigns, and Details because it is about men’s clothing.
Her favorite television show was Laverne and Shirley because they do things
off the norm without getting into trouble. When the counselor asked about
her favorite story, Elaine said it was The Search of Mary Kay Malloy, the story
of an Irish girl’s voyage to America by herself. Elaine reported having two
favorite sayings. The ﬁrst, from Curious George, was ‘‘I am curious about
things.’’ The second was ‘‘Do it well,’’ which to her meant nearly perfectly.
To complete the CCI, Elaine reported the following early recollection: ‘‘Going
to Disneyland with my grandparents and uncle and his girlfriend. I was in
the back of the camper trying to sing and dance for my grandmother. She
told me to sit down so I would not get hurt. I got on uncle’s girlfriend’s
nerves by trying to talk to her. I tried to talk but she did not think I should
move around at the same time.’’ Elaine gave the story this headline: ‘‘Little
girl annoyed because she must sit still.’’
Reconstructing Elaine’s story. In responding to the CCI questions, Elaine
articulated vocational stories that construct her career. The next task in career

174

Career Development and Counseling

construction counseling is to reconstruct these microstories by weaving
them into a macronarrative. To begin to make sense of Elaine’s stories, the
counselor ﬁrst reviewed how she wanted to use the counseling experience.
Her goals framed the perspective from which to view her stories. Elaine
wanted the counselor to help her understand why she could not choose, as
well as move her closer to making a choice, whether medicine or something
else. So in reviewing her career stories, the counselor attended to her sense
of career control and experiences with making decisions.
Second, after considering her goals for counseling, the counselor examined
the preoccupations at the base of her character arc. This began with ﬁnding
the ﬁrst verb in her ER because it indicates a particularly important form
of movement for the client. In Elaine’s ER, the ﬁrst verb is going. This may
mean that she wants to move, be on the go, and travel. The counselor
then inspected the remaining stories for evidence to support this idea. The
inspection found the phrases ‘‘moving around’’ and ‘‘dancing’’ in the ER
and then further support in her favorite story, which tells the story of a
girl’s journey to another country. ‘‘Singing and dancing’’ seem important
to her. She is enthusiastic about life. Also try appears three times in the
ER, suggesting that Elaine may be industrious and persistent in pursuing
difﬁcult goals. Talking also appears in the ER, so she likes to communicate
and attempts to convince others to change their minds. And ﬁnally, in the
ER an adult woman tells her to sit down and stop dancing. The counselor
recognized a tension in Elaine’s life between wanting to be on the go and
being told to sit still. It is important to remember that the ER does not cause
behavior; rather, she has re-membered it to reﬂect her current struggle. From
the many available stories, clients tell those that they themselves need to
hear right now.
Third, the counselor considered the headline that Elaine composed for the
ER as a rhetorical compression that expresses the gist of her story. From
Elaine’s perspective, she is a ‘‘little girl’’ who is annoyed because powerful
others stop her from enthusiastically pursuing her dreams. They want her to
stay put where they place her. It is worthwhile to read the headline in two
ways. On the one hand, it reveals more about a career theme that will shape
her occupational plot. On the other hand, it indicates in the here and now the
problem she wants to work on during counseling. She wants the counselor
to encourage her movement and her gusto for life, as well as teach her how
to persuade others to accept her plan rather than steal her life.
Fourth, the counselor attended to Elaine as an actor and the character
that she has constructed. How Elaine described her role models reveals
core elements in her self-concept and articulates how she wishes to act in
the world. Elaine’s key ﬁgures model spirit, enthusiasm, playfulness, goals,
competitiveness, persistence, temper, ﬁghting wrongheaded authority, and

Career Construction Theory and Practice

175

enlisting compatriots in these battles. These qualities ﬁnd expression in her
other stories. She is not frightened by wild ideas and doing things off the
norm as long as they are fun and do not get her into trouble.
Fifth, the counselor sought to understand how Elaine was attempting to
solve her problems in constructing a career and how occupations could
help her actively master the problems she faced. To do so, the counselor
compared the pain and problems narrated in the ER to the tentative solutions
displayed by her role models. In Elaine’s case, the ER describes a playful
girl being told to sit still and do as she is told. This, of course, resonates
with her current dilemma—sitting still as her mother tells her to major in
premed. The sitting still might be her metaphor for indecision. The counselor
summarized this understanding by drawing a lifeline from the preoccupation
with being told to sit still to the effort to build a self that ﬁghts for her
own independence.
Sixth, the counselor appraised Elaine’s vocational preferences by viewing
her manifest interests through the lens of Holland’s RIASEC hexagon. She
shows interest in fashion, clothing design, and advertising campaigns. She
likes to do things off the norm without getting into trouble. Looking through
the six-sided lens, the counselor sees that Elaine most resembles the Artistic
and Enterprising types. Creating and inﬂuencing are her two strongest
interests. Individuals with this pairing usually show potential for creative
leadership and innovative projects yet do not ﬁt easily into occupational
niches. They also like to travel, have adventures, and display uniqueness.
Enterprising-Artistic types also seem more comfortable being second in
command or on a team because the ﬁrst in command usually resembles the
Enterprising-Conventional type. To brainstorm possible jobs, the counselor
went to the O*NET to ﬁnd occupations listed as Enterprising-Artistic and
Artistic-Enterprising. The lack of Realistic and Investigative characteristics
among Elaine’s manifest interests seems atypical for someone in engineering
(IRE) or medicine (IRS). If Elaine pursues engineering, it may be in some
specialty that emphasizes design work. If she pursues medicine, it might
be in an enterprising specialty such as hospital administration or an artistic
specialty such as dermatology or plastic surgery.
Seventh, the counselor turned to Elaine’s current favored script, which tells
of a young girl who travels the country in search of herself. Elaine is living
this script in that she must search for herself. She has not yet crystallized
an identity; she is ﬁghting off her mother’s attempt to confer on her the
vocational identity of a physician. Her vocational indecisiveness seems
rooted in identity confusion. Career counseling probably should concentrate
on identity interventions and occupational exploration in breadth rather
than exploration in depth and committing to a speciﬁc major. Her advice to
herself is the same—be curious and do it right.

176

Career Development and Counseling

Eighth, the counselor proﬁled Elaine’s career adaptability. It is consistent with her indecisiveness and identity ambiguity. She is coping with
the vocational development task of crystallizing a vocational identity (not
an occupational transition or work trauma) and tentative preferences for
occupational ﬁelds as a prelude to specifying an academic major and occupational choice. She is deeply concerned about the future, as shown by her
entering career counseling for a second time. From her remarks, it is clear
that the major deﬁciency in her adaptabilities is the absence of career control.
The counselor will help Elaine view her indecision as a strength, not a weakness. It is her way of ﬁghting powerful creatures who are trying to control
her career. She shows some curiosity about possible selves and alternative
occupations. For example, she has written to another college for information. She already knows implicitly that exploratory behavior is paramount
because her advice to herself is to be curious and do it right. She could use
more conﬁdence in her ability to make it happen. With an increased sense of
self-control and more information seeking, her career conﬁdence will grow.
Reconstructing a life portrait. Having considered the actor, agent, author,
advice, and arc, the counselor then moved to synthesize them into a life
portrait (Lawrence-Lightfoot & Davis, 1997). The counselor composed a life
portrait to capture Elaine’s situation, leaving room to insert and elaborate
the ﬁnishing touches that the client must add during counseling. The portrait
included tentative answers to implicit questions such as ‘‘Who am I?’’ ‘‘What
is my quest?’’ and ‘‘How can I grow and ﬂourish?’’ The portrait emphasized
and repeated the major career theme, afﬁrming its signiﬁcance and validity.
Then the counselor used the theme with its character arc to unite the meaning
of the client’s separate career stories into a narrative structure that integrated
the diverse vocational stories. The counselor intended to illuminate what
is at stake and the choices to be made to enhance the client’s ability to
decide. After the counselor sketched a portrayal that included the character
(innovative leader or leader of innovation) that the client wishes to play, the
stage on which she wishes to place the action (travel and adventure), the
script she wishes to enact now (self-discovery), the advice she gives herself
(be curious yet conscientious), and the arc of her character (struggling to
make up her own mind), the counselor was ready to engage Elaine in a
conversation about the goals she brought to counseling.
Second session. Good movie directors set up a vista before they take viewers
into a scene and then a moment. Thus, the counselor delineated the vista
by reviewing Elaine’s response to the opening inquiry regarding how she
might use counseling. Then the counselor presented the life portrait in a

Career Construction Theory and Practice

177

way that highlighted her developmental trajectory, especially her movement
from problem to strength, so that she could actually feel her own movement
from tension to intention. The counselor presented the portrait as a tentative
sketch and invited Elaine to amend and alter it to ﬁt her understanding. In
the end, the validity of the coconstructed portrayal is arbitrated by its utility
to the client.
The counselor depicted Elaine’s current career theme as ﬁghting powerful
creatures who are trying to steal her mind or, in this particular instance,
her career. She rebels by sitting still and refusing to decide in their favor
while she marshals personal resources and social support to make her own
choice. Then the counselor paused to get her reaction and revisions. The
counselor explored her feelings about the portrait, because affect helps to
create meaning. They also looked at her strengths, especially the personal
characteristics of which she was proudest. They then discussed how the
problems she currently faced were really the best solutions that she could
come up with so far. For example, Elaine and her counselor reconstructed
her indecision from being a problem to being the best solution she has found
for trying to ﬁght off the creatures who are trying to steal her career by
making her sit still for what they want. In this way, the counselor attempted
to help her use language, especially her own favorite metaphors and verbs,
as a means of controlling the situation and increasing feelings of agency.
Then the counselor helped Elaine understand how her personal narrative in
the ER (singing, dancing, persuading) illuminated her professional interests
in Artistic and Enterprising activities. In the end, Elaine and her counselor
coconstructed the version of the life portrait that she wanted to use to address
the career concerns she brought to counseling.
Coconstruction of her career narrative already had addressed Elaine’s
ﬁrst concern—understanding why she did not (rather than cannot) make
a decision regarding her academic major. Thus, the counselor moved to
her second question—how well a career in medicine would suit her. They
considered her manifest interests and how she might wish to position
herself in society. They discussed her interests in being a leader, manager,
or supervisor who is independent, creative, and on the go. The counselor
commented that if she were to become a physician, she would probably be
attracted to a specialty such as plastic surgery or dermatology. They talked
about exploring majors in computer science (because she mentioned she
had written for information about computer majors), advertising, marketing,
and business management. They also discussed the importance of her
considering being on the move, traveling, and having adventures as she
thinks of possible selves and future scenarios. Most of all, they discussed
discovering a way in which she could ﬂourish and places where selfdeﬁnition and self-determination would be possible.

178

Career Development and Counseling

Having addressed, to her satisfaction, the issue of how well medicine suited
her and which other ﬁelds merited exploration, the counselor turned to her
third question, which was how to move forward toward choosing a major.
They discussed ways forward from where she now sits, including alternative
resolutions and possible selves. The counselor explained that development
arises from activity and overcoming difﬁculties met in the world. They then
engaged in a conversation about self-construction activities that might move
her closer to being the person she wanted to be, such as working at a summer
job away from home, living in a college dormitory, taking a workshop on
assertiveness, and meeting with a counselor to discuss family issues. She
was encouraged by the conversation and felt that looking back over her life
had given her the ability to move forward and the resolve to do so. They
agreed to talk on the phone in the middle of the next semester and meet
again during the summer.
Follow-up. The next summer when she visited the counselor, Elaine reported
that she had taken a continuing education course in assertiveness, worked
with a college counselor for ﬁve sessions to improve her relationship with
her parents and reduce her perfectionism, lived away from home while
working a summer job at an amusement park, and completed elective
courses in computer science and advertising. She had declared a major in
chemical engineering with a minor in computer science yet still wondered if
marketing would better ﬁt her.
Epilogue. The counselor next saw Elaine after she graduated with a major
in chemical engineering and a minor in computer science. She told the
counselor how much she had enjoyed her courses but detested the sexism exhibited by many of her instructors. To combat their bias, she had
organized a club for females who were majoring in engineering. She was
proud of what they had achieved in combating sexism. She was even
more proud of the occupational position that she had recently secured. In
two weeks, she would begin a job as a computer systems analyst for a
large chemical company. This position required traveling throughout the
United States with a team of colleagues to regional branches, where she
would solve their computer problems. Furthermore, Elaine told the counselor that she and her mother were now friendly and that her mother
was proud of her accomplishments and pleased with her prospects. Elaine
looked forward to now becoming a woman on the go, one encouraged by
a mother who tells her not to sit still. She glowed as she told me how
she had used the things that we had talked about to help her roommates
and friends make career choices. Six years later, after obtaining a master’s

Career Construction Theory and Practice

179

in chemical engineering consulting, she was working as an consultant
in chemical product design and enjoyed designing clothing during her
leisure time.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Career construction theory explains the interpretive and interpersonal process that individuals as actors, agents, and authors use to make a self,
shape an identity, and build a career. The theory highlights the role of two
metacompetencies—adaptability and identity—in coping with vocational
development tasks, occupational transitions, and work traumas. Adaptability instills the will and skill to direct one’s own work life; identity imposes
meaning on vocational behavior and work activities. The theory structures
a scheme for selecting career interventions and informs a model for career
construction counseling. In career construction counseling, practitioners may
assist clients to know their reputation as an actor, strivings as an agent, and
recurring themes as an author. And more important, counseling for career
construction encourages actors to use their adaptability and identity to select
and engage in actions that create a more satisfying life.
• Career construction counseling concentrates on clients making meaning,

forming intentions, and taking purposive action as they design their
lives, make vocational choices, negotiate occupational transitions, and
cope with troubles at work. Counseling involves collaborative construction, deconstruction, reconstruction, and coconstruction of career
narratives that script actions that lead to a more satisfying life and
successful career.
• Opening career construction counseling ﬁnds practitioners asking clients
how counseling may be useful to them. Counselors collaborate with each
client to craft a shared goal for counseling, one that fosters a working
alliance.
• Constructing a career narrative begins with counselors eliciting stories
from clients about important incidents, recurrent episodes, and selfdeﬁning moments. Counselors may prompt such stories by asking
clients about their role models, enjoyable magazines and television
programs, favorite book and movies, comforting mottoes, and early
recollections.
• Deconstructing these micronarratives requires counselors to consider
whether a client’s stories include self-limiting ideas, conﬁning roles, or
cultural barriers. If the stories do restrict clients, then counselors help
clients to think differently about the stories so as to access new meanings
that open possibilities and restart stalled initiatives.

180

Career Development and Counseling

• Reconstructing involves integrating the small stories into a macronar-

rative or large story that concentrates on the occupational plot that
binds the stories together and the career theme that invests them with
meaning. The resulting life portrait reorganizes experiences to sediment
values, emphasize priorities, and highlight recurrent action tendencies.
• Coconstructing collaboratively revises the life portrait with new language,
fresh perspectives, and expanded vistas that explain what is at stake in
the next episode of the career story. This self-clarity enables clients to
make their intentions more apparent to themselves and their counselors.
With this newfound clarity, clients may envision the next scenes, choose
priorities, and form intentions.
• Performing the new meanings turns intention into action. Clients need
to ﬁnd courage to enact the next scene and live the new story. If a
client hesitates to enact the choice, then practitioners attend to possible
barriers and adaptability resources.
• Closing career construction counseling involves conﬁrming that clients
have accomplished the goals they brought to counseling. Counselors
usually end with a few sentences that summarize what has occurred
during counseling. In the end, the career problem is resolved, not by
giving new information, but by making explicit what the client already
knew and encouraging purposive action in light of this knowledge.

REFERENCES
Arthur, M. B. (1994). The boundaryless career [Special issue]. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 15(4).
Beck, U. (1994). Risk society: Towards a new modernity. London, UK: Sage.
Blustein, D. L., & Flum, H. (1999). A self-determination perspective of interests
and exploration in career development. In M. L. Savickas & A. R. Spokane
(Eds.), Vocational interests: Meaning, measurement, and counseling use (pp. 345–368).
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Brown, S., & Lent, R. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 355–367.
Carter, H. D. (1940). The development of vocational attitudes. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 4, 185–191.
Chae, Y., Goodman, G. S., & Edelstein, R. S. (2011). Autobiographical memory
development from an attachment perspective: The special role of negative events.
Advances in Child Development, 40, 1–49.
Craig, K. (2009). Reputation: A network interpretation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Beattie, O. V. (1979). Life themes: A theoretical and empirical
exploration of their origins and effects. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 19,
45–63.

Career Construction Theory and Practice

181

Erikson, E. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Fitzsimons, G. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2010). Interpersonal inﬂuences on self-regulation.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19, 101–105.
Forster, E. M. (1927). Aspects of the novel. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Habermas, T., & Bluck, S. (2000). Getting a life: The emergence of the life story in
adolescence. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 748–769.
Hall, D. T. (1996). Protean careers of the 21st century. Academy of Management
Executive, 10, 8–16.
Hall, D. T., & Mirvis, P. H. (1995). The new career contract. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 47, 269–289.
Heckhausen, J., Wrosch, C., & Schulz, R. (2010). A motivational theory of life-span
development. Psychological Review, 117(1), 32–60.
Heinz, W. R. (2002). Transition discontinuities and the biographical shaping of
early work careers. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 60, 220–240. doi:10.1006/jvbe
.2001.1865
Hogan, R. (1983). A socioanalytic theory of personality. In M. Page (Ed.), Nebraska
symposium on motivation 1982 (pp. 55–89). Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Josselson, R. (2000). Stability and change in early memories over 22 years: Themes,
variations, and cadenzas. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 64, 462–481.
Kalleberg, A. L. (2009). Precarious work, insecure workers: Employment relations in
transition. American Sociological Review, 74, 1–22.
Kitson, H. D. (1942). Creating vocational interests. Occupations, 20, 567–571.
Krieshok, T. S., Black, M. D., & McKay, R. A. (2009). Career decision making: The
limits of rationality and the abundance of non-conscious processes. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 75, 275–290. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2009.04.006
Kuhn, T. S. (1996). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions (3rd ed.). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Lawrence-Lightfoot, S., & Davis, J. H. (1997). The art and science of portraiture. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Leontiev, A. N. (1983). The deed is the beginning of personality. In V. Davydov,
V. Zinchenko, A. A. Leontiev, & A. Petrovskij (Eds.), A. N. Leontiev. Izbrannie
psihologicheskie proizvedija [A. N. Leontiev. Selected psychological works] (Vol. 1,
pp. 381–385). Moscow, Russia: Pedagogika.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1991). Essentials of person–environment correspondence
counseling. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Malrieu, P. (2003). La question du sens dans les dires autobiographiques [The issue of
meaning in autobiographical narratives]. Toulouse, France: Erès.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York, NY: Harper.
McAdams, D. P. (1995). What do we know when we know a person? Journal of
Personality, 63, 365–396.

182

Career Development and Counseling

McAdams, D. P., & Olson, B. D. (2010). Personality development: Continuity
and change over the life course. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 517–542.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100507
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the structure of behavior.
New York, NY: Holt.
Mischel, W., & Morf, C. C. (2003). The self as a psycho-social dynamic processing
system: A meta-perspective on a century of the self in psychology. In M. R. Leary
& J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 15–46). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Mullins, J. (2009). Career planning the second time around. Occupational Outlook
Quarterly, 5, 12–15.
Neuman, Y., & Nave, O. (2009). Why the brain needs language in order to be
self-conscious. New Ideas in Psychology, 28, 37–48.
Porfeli, E. J., & Savickas, M. L. (2012). The Career Adapt-Abilities Scale: Construction,
reliability, and initial validity of the USA form., Journal of Vocational Behavior, 80,
748–753.
Rangel, U., & Keller, J. (2011). Essentialism goes social: Belief in social determinism
as a component of psychological essentialism. Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 100, 1056–1078. doi:10.1037/a0022401
Ricoeur, P. (1984). Time and narrative. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rosenberg, M. (1989). Society and the adolescent self-image (rev. ed.). Middletown, CT:
Wesleyan University Press.
Savickas, M. L. (1989). Career-style assessment and counseling. In T. Sweeney (Ed.),
Adlerian counseling: A practical approach for a new decade (3rd ed., pp. 289–320).
Muncie, IN: Accelerated Development Press.
Savickas, M. L. (1996). A framework for linking career theory and practice. In M.
L. Savickas & W. B. Walsh (Eds.), Handbook of career counseling theory and practice.
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Savickas, M. L. (1997). Adaptability: An integrative construct for life-span, life-space
theory. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 247–259.
Savickas, M. L. (2006). Career counseling (Speciﬁc Treatments for Speciﬁc Populations
Video Series). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Savickas, M. L. (2009). Career counseling over time (Psychotherapy in Six Sessions
Video Series). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Savickas, M. L. (2011a). Career counseling. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press.
Savickas, M. L. (2011b). The self in vocational psychology: Object, subject, and
project. In P. J. Hartung & L. M. Subich (Eds.), Developing self in work and career:
Concepts, cases, and contexts (pp. 17–33). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press.
Savickas, M. L. (2012). Life design: A paradigm for career intervention in the 21st
century. Journal of Counseling and Development, 90, 13–19.
Savickas, M. L., & Porfeli, E. J. (2012). Revision of the Career Maturity Inventory:
The adaptability form. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 80, 661–673.

Career Construction Theory and Practice

183

Savickas, M. L., Silling, S. M., & Schwartz, S. (1984). Time perspective in career
maturity and decision making. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 25, 258–269.
Sedikides, C., & Anderson, C. A. (1994). Causal perceptions of inter-trait relations:
The glue that holds person types together. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
20, 294–302.
Super, D. E. (1951). Vocational adjustment: Implementing a self-concept. Occupations,
30, 88–92.
Super, D. E. (1957). The psychology of careers. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Super, D. E. (1963). Career development: Self-concept theory. New York, NY: CEEB.
Super, D. E. (1983). Assessment in career guidance: Toward truly developmental
counseling. Personnel and Guidance Journal, 61, 555–562.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society (M. Cole, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Williamson, E. G., & Bordin, E. S. (1941). The evaluation of vocational and educational counseling: A critique of the methodology of experiments. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 1, 5–24.

SECTION TWO

THE ROLE OF DIVERSITY,
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES,
AND SOCIAL FACTORS IN
CAREER DEVELOPMENT,
CHOICE, AND ADJUSTMENT

CHAPTER 7

Women, Men, and Work: The Long
Road to Gender Equity
MARY J. HEPPNER

W

one of the most salient predictors
of virtually all aspects of one’s work and career development
is one’s gender. In essence, being born male or female is a
powerful predictor of a host of life factors, including whether one works
inside or outside the home (or both), the type of jobs one perceives as
appropriate, the type of jobs one will be hired to perform, how far one is
likely to climb, the level and type of harassment one experiences, the amount
of money one will receive, the amount of conﬂict or enrichment one gets
from work and family life, the amount of job satisfaction one reports, and
ultimately the quality of one’s life (Walsh & Heppner, 2006).
Although recent decades have brought greater gender equity for some
men and women, much work remains to be done in most countries around
the world, including the United States. For example, a recent United Nations
report concludes that (a) women have not achieved equity with men in
any country; (b) of the world’s 1.3 billion poor, nearly 70% are women;
(c) between 75% and 80% of the world’s 27 million refugees are women
and children; (d) out of the world’s 1 billion illiterate adults, two-thirds
are women; (e) the majority of women earn an average of three-fourths of
the pay of men doing the same work in both developing and developed
countries; and (f) women are chronically underrepresented in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and math) careers in developed countries around
the world (Hausmann, Tyson, & Zahidi, 2010).
Rather than viewing these as ‘‘women’s problems,’’ it is critical to appreciate the ‘‘fundamental transformation’’ that took place at the fourth Global
ORLDWIDE, THROUGHOUT HISTORY,

187

188

Career Development and Counseling

Women’s Conference in Beijing, where participants saw ‘‘the need to shift
the focus from women to the concept of gender, recognizing that the entire
structure of society, and all relations between men and women within it,
had to be re-evaluated. Only by such a fundamental restructuring of society
and its institutions could women be fully empowered to take their rightful
place as equal partners with men in all aspects of life . . . . [This thinking
represents] a strong reafﬁrmation that women’s rights are human rights and
that gender equity is an issue of universal concern beneﬁting all’’ (Division
for the Advancement of Women, 2000, p. 1). This position is consistent with
that of the ﬁelds of counseling and counseling psychology, which have long
stressed the mission of social justice (Arredondo & Perez, 2003). There is
perhaps no clearer way to achieve social justice than through ﬁnding meaningful employment that allows both men and women to have ‘‘full and equal
participation in a society that is mutually shaped to meet their needs. Social
justice includes a vision of society in which the distribution of resources
is equitable and all members are physically and psychologically safe and
secure’’ (Bell, 1997, p. 3).
Improving gender equity in countries including the United States not
only improves the condition of individual men’s and women’s lives but
also is critical for the functioning of societies. In the UN’s earlier programs
that were designed for women in countries around the world, women
were thought of as passive recipients of support and assistance. This view
has changed dramatically, however, to recognize that the development of
countries is not possible without the full participation of women. ‘‘As the
working age population continues to shrink around the world, the mismatch
between where talent is available and where it is needed, will inevitably
worsen. Solving this conundrum is not easy and means considering untapped
and underleveraged talent pools. Unfortunately, women remain chronically
underrepresented in the workforce’’ (Hausmann et al., 2010, p. 10). Thus, to
close the gender gap in all work-related areas is of beneﬁt not only to the
individual but also to the society as a whole.
It is with this philosophical backdrop that this chapter is written. In
essence, the position taken here is that (a) issues of occupational stereotyping,
work–family conﬂict or enrichment, comparable worth, glass ceiling/sticky
ﬂoors, and disparities in STEM careers are gender issues; (b) the problems
faced in the United States relevant to equity can be placed within a larger
global context; and (c) by placing them in this context, they become issues
of universal concern whose resolution beneﬁts everyone. Vocational psychologists and career counselors are in a unique position to help solve these
pressing gender-related problems that are literally affecting the health and
well-being of countries and peoples around the world. In that sense, we have
a very clear mission, to use the rigor of our research and the innovations of

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

189

our practice to understand and intervene with issues of gender parity that at
times seem local but, in fact, are often universal.
The chapter also recognizes that men continue to be victims of gender role
stereotyping, and many perceive a highly restricted range of occupational
alternatives due to their gender. There is clear evidence that there continues
to be discrimination particularly against gay men, men of color, immigrant
men, men living in poverty, and men making nontraditional career choices
(Heppner & Heppner, 2001; O’Neil, 2008). Perhaps most profoundly, men
die earlier than women in almost every country in the world, a fact attributed
at least in part to their having more dangerous and stressful occupations
(Brooks & Good, 2001).
Work can be a source of enrichment, joy, and meaning for people, but it
can also be a source of stress and pain. Some of the stress and pain can be
attributed to the differential treatment of men and women in societies around
the world and how the social construction of gender causes disparities that
can greatly impact the quality of work lives. Thus, it is the purpose of this
chapter to review what we currently know about men, women, and work;
to offer suggestions for helping clients to examine these issues within an
ecological perspective; and to encourage career professionals to work to
change systems that perpetuate inequality.
The chapter reviews the literature on three critical areas across the life span
related to gender and work: (1) early development and the role of occupational stereotyping in shaping one’s occupational choices; (2) gender-related
issues in job choice and entry, such as entry into STEM careers, motherhood, gender-related career issues for men, stay-at-home parent roles for
men, and men choosing nontraditional occupations; and (3) gender-related
experiences once in the workforce, such as salary and gender segregation,
gender-based harassment, comparable worth, gender and job satisfaction,
and work–family conﬂict or enhancement. The chapter also provides an
analysis of the gender validity of prominent foundational and modern
career development theories. Finally, the chapter concludes with speciﬁc
suggestions for career development practitioners working with men and
women.
EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND THE ROLE OF
OCCUPATIONAL STEREOTYPING
Gender roles are ‘‘socially and culturally deﬁned prescriptions and beliefs
about the behavior and emotions of men and women’’ (Anselmi & Law,
1998, p. 195) that form the basis of gender identity. These stereotypes are
shared assumptions that societies have about occupations and are taught
both in explicit and highly subtle and nuanced ways (Stangor & Shaller,

190

Career Development and Counseling

1996). Clear and consistent evidence indicates that this social and cultural
construction of gender and its impact on the work that men and women
eventually obtain starts very early in a child’s life. For example, studies
indicate that occupational stereotypes develop as early as the preschool years
(ages 4–5) (Care, Deans, & Brown, 2007; Gottfredson, 2005), with children
indicating stereotypic views of appropriate occupations for each gender,
which can severely limit children’s perceived range of gender-appropriate
occupational alternatives.
Research on occupational stereotyping in adolescents and adults typically
asks participants about their explicit beliefs about occupations. For example,
participants may be given a list of occupations and asked which occupations
require masculine or feminine traits. This type of methodology has been
criticized as highly subject to socially desirable responding. For example,
individuals who hold stereotypic views of occupations may not express
them if they believe that responding in such a manner is either socially unacceptable or illegal (e.g., Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII). Researchers have
therefore developed more sophisticated methodologies to assess implicit
occupational stereotypes. This methodology measures participants’ underlying automatic associations and the length of cognitive retrieval time when
they are subjected to gender-typical and atypical stimuli. Findings indicate
that individuals have implicit stereotypes of occupations that persist even
when more explicitly expressed stereotypic views have lessened (White &
White, 2006).
Children are frequently exposed to explicit sex role stereotyping of occupations, but a subtler, less conscious form of gender prejudice also has the
power to affect the lives of men and women. Dovidio and his colleagues
have found evidence of subtle forms of racism and how they may impact the
livelihoods of African Americans (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2000). Such subtle
manifestations of bias may also impact thoughts, feelings, and, ultimately,
actions related to gender. Thus, even well-educated people who perceive
themselves to be aware of gender role stereotypes may still respond unconsciously in a stereotypic manner. There is also some evidence that this implicit
assessment of one’s beliefs and attitudes may predict behavior better than
explicit measures of occupational stereotypes (Greenwald & Nosek, 2001).
Thus, as children learn occupational stereotypes early in life, these lessons
may persist in the unconscious and affect one’s perceptions and behaviors,
even when contradictory information is provided by later life experiences.
This type of internalized sexism and sex-stereotyped beliefs and behaviors
affect both men and women and may inﬂuence, to a greater degree than
realized, the occupations they assume and the mechanisms by which even
well-meaning people collude with structures of gender oppression.

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

191

These culturally held stereotypes about gender have been shown to bias
individuals’ assessment of their competence at various career-related tasks,
even when controlling for actual ability at doing that task (Correll, 2001). In
essence, if a boy or girl comes to believe that he or she is less competent at a
task because of gender, this biased perception has been shown to constrain
early career-relevant choices. For example, research has found that girls are
signiﬁcantly more likely to report that they are not smart enough or good
enough to attain their desired careers (O’Brien, Friedman, Tipton, & Linn,
2000). Furthermore, O’Brien and her colleagues found that over the 5 years
of their study, young women chose less prestigious and more traditional
careers than those to which they had aspired as high school seniors. In
addition, they tended to choose careers that underutilized their abilities
(O’Brien et al., 2000).
This gender-based stereotyping of careers is an ongoing phenomenon. As
new technologies create new occupations, it is essential to understand how
cultural beliefs about the gender appropriateness of occupations emerge
and are fostered in societies. For example, a consistent gender gap has
been observed both in the use of technology by the young and in the
pursuit of technology-related occupations, with boys having a more positive
attitude toward computers and more opportunity for mastery of them.
This technology gender gap is found in childhood and continues to be
reﬂected in occupational selection later in life (Butler, 2000). Thus, only by
understanding the mechanisms of sex role stereotyping can gender inequities
start to be addressed so that women and men can perceive themselves as
equally competent in the full range of occupations that exist and are being
developed.
GENDER-RELATED ISSUES IN JOB CHOICE AND ENTRY
It is important to acknowledge the unspoken privilege of choice. As Blustein
(2006, 2011) and Richardson (1993) have poignantly described, the vast
majority of women and men in the world have limited volition or choice
in what they do to support themselves and their families. Although the
fundamental tenets of career counseling as it has developed in the United
States emphasizes freedom of choice (Gysbers, Heppner, & Johnston, 2009),
the reality is that many people, even within developed countries, do not
make career choices based on interest, values, or abilities. The fact that
developed countries have more people with the assumed privilege of choice
often masks the fact that even in these countries many people do not freely
choose a career. Even for people with the privilege of choice, the range of
appropriate alternatives may be limited by gender, race, class, ability status,

192

Career Development and Counseling

sexual orientation, and a host of other factors (Gottfredson, 2005). A prime
example of this is in the long-term disparities between women and men
choosing to go into STEM careers.
STEM Careers: A Gender Issue
In all developed and developing countries, there is a great need for more
individuals who are trained in STEM occupational ﬁelds because these ﬁelds
are critically important to the development of countries and the well-being
of citizens around the world. Fully utilizing human resources in this area is
seen as a way to improve many aspects of lives in the world community.
STEM careers are disproportionally inhabited by males, leading researchers
in countries around the globe to ask why we are losing talented women to
other ﬁelds. Throughout the decades, many hypotheses have been proposed
to answer this question, including biological differences, broad contextual
inﬂuences, and differences in motivation, interests, or attitudes. At the heart
of STEM career ﬁelds is mathematics, which has been labeled the ‘‘critical
ﬁlter’’ for women’s career development (Betz, 1994, 2006). Researchers have
been conducting increasingly sophisticated investigations over the last two
decades to understand and remediate the underrepresentation of women in
STEM ﬁelds. From their work, we are getting a more precise picture of the
problem and some possible solutions.
One important part of the problem involves gender stereotypes that
perpetuate the myth that girls are not as good at math as boys. Despite the
scientiﬁc evidence that now clearly disputes this stereotype, it still exists and
is at times reinforced by parents, teachers, peers, and the media. The data
indicate that math performance for girls and women has steadily increased
over the past two decades, leading Boaler and Irving (2007) to conclude:
‘‘As we survey the landscape of gender and mathematics relationships
in various countries around the world . . . in many countries differences in
boys and girls mathematics achievement that used to prevail have been
eradicated’’ (p. 287). Various reasons are posited for this equality, such as
the possibility that mathematics classrooms are becoming more girl-friendly.
However, the continued prevalence of stereotypes concerning females’ math
inferiority is cause for much concern, given mounting evidence that negative
‘‘stereotype threat’’ can impair the actual performance of girls and women
on math-related tasks (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999).
A recent study by Correll (2001) depicts the mechanisms by which these
stereotypes can impact competency beliefs and career choice. In her analyses
of a large data set, she found that, even when achieving comparable math
grades and test scores, males assessed their own mathematical competence
more highly than did females. Furthermore, perceptions of competence in

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

193

mathematics were found to relate positively to the odds of continuing on a
path leading to a quantitative career. Thus, even though males’ competency
ratings were not based on any indication of greater ability, their higher
perceptions of competence led them to pursue the kinds of activities that
would allow them to enter a math-related ﬁeld. Correll noted that ‘‘boys do
not pursue mathematical activities at a higher rate than girls do because they
are better at mathematics. They do so, at least partially, because they think
they are better’’ (p. 1724). Thus biased gender beliefs regarding self-perceived
competence may be one critical mechanism in the process of STEM gender
disparity.
Correll (2001) also found that mathematics grades had a signiﬁcantly
more positive effect on girls’ than on boys’ conﬁdence levels. This may
suggest that positive performance experiences are especially important in
counteracting strong societal messages about the gender appropriateness of
different careers. Identifying mechanisms such as biased gender beliefs is
important not only to the STEM ﬁelds but also potentially to other ﬁelds. For
example, if boys feel they are less competent at nurturing or caregiving, they
may be less likely to go into nursing or other human service ﬁelds where
there are critical shortages.
One of the reasons previously given for women’s lack of participation
in STEM ﬁelds is that they have not chosen to pursue advanced training
that would qualify them for these positions. However, these ﬁgures have
changed dramatically over the last decade. For example, by 2001 women
were earning almost half (48%) of the bachelor’s degrees in mathematics
(National Science Foundation, 2007) and also were going on to earn almost
a third (29%) of the doctorates (Hill & Johnson, 2004). But even with these
advances, women still represent less than one-fourth of the STEM labor force
(Fassinger & Asay, 2006).
In a recent study, Else-Quest, Hyde, and Lynn (2010) analyzed data on
493,495 students across 69 counties and found very small gender-related
mean differences in math achievement but considerable variability in effect
sizes by country. These country differences were found to be predicted by
speciﬁc domains of gender equity reﬂecting women’s status and welfare.
The most powerful predictors were gender equity in school enrollment,
women’s share of research jobs, and women’s parliamentary representation. The authors concluded that ‘‘girls will perform at the same level as
their male classmates when they are encouraged to succeed, are given the
necessary educational tools, and have visible female role models excelling
in mathematics’’ (p. 125). These analyses are a powerful example of how
improving gender equity in societies can result in greater participation in
critical occupations needed for the development and health of the whole
society.

194

Career Development and Counseling

In their development of an evidence-based causal model to explain
women’s underrepresentation in STEM careers, Ceci, Williams, and Barnett
(2009) examined over 400 cross-disciplinary studies, including approximately 20 meta-analyses. They found that math-talented women disproportionately choose nonmath ﬁelds and are more likely to leave math-intensive
ﬁelds. In addition, these math-talented women were more likely to have
high verbal competence, which allows for a wider array of attractive occupational choices. Ceci and colleagues also found that more men than women
score in the extreme range on gatekeeper tests like the SAT Mathematics
or the GRE Quantitative Reasoning test. They concluded from the evidence that these results are based on sociocultural rather than biological
factors. This study emphasizes that math-talented women tend to be multitalented and have many career options. Many researchers have pointed
to the male environment in STEM ﬁelds and the image of the lonely scientist as a factor in women choosing more attractive non-STEM alternatives
(Eccles, 2007).
Social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994; see
Chapter 5, this volume) predicts that to develop interest in a particular ﬁeld,
individuals need to have both self-efﬁcacy in their ability to perform the
tasks required in that ﬁeld and positive outcome expectancies about what it
would be like to be in that career ﬁeld. The evidence suggests that women’s
STEM-related self-efﬁcacy beliefs tend to be lower than men’s when ability
is held constant, and their STEM-related outcome expectancies are also less
positive (Ceci et al., 2009). Although many programs seem to be in place
to help develop young women’s self-efﬁcacy beliefs regarding their ability
to pursue STEM careers (see National Science Foundation, Advance Grants,
http://www.nsf.gov), fewer programs seem to be aimed at creating a more
woman-friendly work environment, which may lead to more positive outcome expectancies. As Fassinger and Asay (2006) pointed out, much of this
work will require systemic change that would beneﬁt all workers, including
‘‘developing educational and workplace policies that afﬁrm and support all
workers (e.g., equitably distributed beneﬁts, antidiscrimination statements);
instituting educational and workplace practices that help to counter discriminatory attitudes (e.g., training in diversity, transparent performance
review and reward systems); implementing social policies and laws that
support families in all diverse forms (e.g., accessible child care, medical and
legal beneﬁts available to all families); and, ﬁnally, transforming gender
socialization practices so that all individuals have the freedom and support
to actualize their best selves’’ (pp. 450–451).
STEM careers offer perhaps the best example of the damaging impact on
societies when mathematics-talented women—who could be making such a
difference in the lives of others through their involvement in these critically

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

195

important occupational sectors—do not enter them. The increasingly sophisticated studies being done in this area offer cross-national, longitudinal,
and large-scale representative samples with rigorous designs. They provide much new insight into the problem of lack of gender equity in STEM
ﬁelds. The evidence suggests that much of the discrepancy between men’s
and women’s entry into STEM ﬁelds is associated with (a) social and cultural factors relating to societal messages about appropriate careers for men
and women and (b) work environments that are not perceived as attractive to multitalented women. In addition, Lubinski and Benbow’s (2006)
large-scale longitudinal research on men and women who pursue math
and science careers suggests that differences in values (e.g., social/altruistic
in women) account for some of the variance in why highly math-talented
women (in the top 1% of the distribution of math ability) choose to enter
medicine, law, and the social sciences rather than STEM ﬁelds. Learning more
about the mechanisms underlying these choices can be helpful not only to
the STEM ﬁelds but also to other ﬁelds where men and women enter at
different rates.
Gender-Related Career Issues for Men
Much has been written about the societal importance of having men in
helping professions such as nursing (which is facing critical shortages)
and elementary school teaching (where they are needed as role models)
and in stay-at-home parent roles. But if men perceive themselves as less
competent at nurturing or caregiving in the same way that women rate
themselves as less able at mathematics, similar imbalances may occur in
these occupational roles. What makes this imbalance even more likely is the
lower wages that accompany female-dominated professions, including the
helping professions.
Stay-at-Home Parent Roles for Men
Rochlen, McKelley, Suizzo, and Scaringi (2008) studied a sample of 213 stayat-home fathers. They found that these men had high levels of relationship
and life satisfaction, strong social support, high parenting self-efﬁcacy, and
low conformity to traditional male norms. Men who had lower adherence to
restrictive male gender norms seemed to be able to be more secure with their
identity and able to face the negative views some may still hold regarding
their choice. Speciﬁcally, parental self-efﬁcacy was a signiﬁcant predictor
of psychological well-being and life satisfaction. In essence, men who were
more conﬁdent in their parenting reported higher levels of life satisfaction
and less psychological distress.

196

Career Development and Counseling

Men Choosing Nontraditional Occupations
Although the scholarly literature base on women going into nontraditional
careers is far more extensive than that for men, there are several key studies
on men and traditionality of career choice that offer information helpful to
career practitioners. Generally, these studies have indicated that men who
choose nontraditional career ﬁelds tend to have more liberal social attitudes,
higher degree aspirations, and higher socioeconomic status than do men
who choose more gender-typical career ﬁelds (Lease, 2003). In addition,
Jome and Tokar (1998) found that men who chose nontraditional careers
tend to endorse less antifemininity and toughness norms and have less
concern with restricting their emotion and expressing affection toward other
men. These men also reported less homophobia. In a follow-up study, Tokar
and Jome (1998) found that men’s endorsement of masculine gender roles
predicted their vocational interests, and those interests, in turn, predicted
their career choice traditionality. Thus, it appears that the relationships
between gender role constructs and traditional or nontraditional choices
may be more complex than earlier thought and may inﬂuence interest
formation, which, in turn, may predict career choice.
The studies that examine traditional and nontraditional career choices for
men have been conducted primarily on White heterosexual men. This reﬂects
the fact that the career development of people of color has, until recently,
been understudied by researchers (see Fouad & Kantamneni, Chapter 8,
this volume). An exception is a study by Flores, Navarro, Smith, and
Ploszaj (2006), who examined the career choice goals of Mexican American adolescent men with an extended version of the SCCT career choice
model. Findings from this investigation indicated that Mexican American adolescent men’s nontraditional career self-efﬁcacy was predicted by
parental support and their acculturation level. They also found that fathers’
career nontraditionality predicted their sons’ nontraditional career selfefﬁcacy. This kind of theory-based research on the nontraditional choices of
diverse men and women is critical to the understanding of gender equity in
career choice.
Motherhood
Perhaps the most profound event affecting women’s career development
is that of motherhood—speciﬁcally, when and if one becomes a mother,
how many children she has, her age at ﬁrst and subsequent births, and
how becoming a mother impacts her ability to work outside the home.
Although many women around the world work full-time at child rearing,
little scholarly research has been conducted on this group of women. As
Schultheiss (2009) poignantly describes, many women deﬁne motherhood as

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

197

a career, but our U.S. Census data, our career research and theories, and our
common deﬁnitions of career do not include this critical job. Moreover, our
reward structures favor paid employment outside the home. ‘‘This leaves
many women who mother or care for others with a disturbing choice: to
mother or to matter—in the workplace, in society, and in the family where
women are often burdened and disregarded in their care giving roles’’
(Schultheiss, 2009, p. 26). Although the women’s movement of the 1960s
brought expanded occupational options for women, these options tended
to require that women conform to male-dominated hierarchies rather than
validating women’s unique experiences. As Gysbers and colleagues (2009)
discuss, there is a critical need for vocational psychologists and career
counselors to work for structural and policy changes that recognize the full
range of women’s options.
In the United States, women are giving birth at later ages, with births to
mothers over the age of 35 increasing by 64% over the time frame 1990 to 2008.
This delay in mothering is related to greater educational attainment prior
to motherhood. The birthrate among unmarried women is also increasing,
particularly in African American and Latina women. The U.S. fertility rate
is higher than most other developed nations (e.g., Canada, Asia, most of
Europe), though the United States has a poorer parental leave policy than
most of these nations (Pew Research Center, 2010). In the United States,
mothers continue to have high rates of labor market participation, with
approximately 71% working outside the home. Mothers with older children
(6–17) are more likely to participate than women with younger children.
Unmarried mothers (76%) have higher participation rates than married
mothers (69%) (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009).
There is a wage gap in the United States and other countries among
working mothers versus childfree women. According to a study by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2002),
the monthly earnings of childfree women were higher than that of mothers
by an average of 5%. The authors of this report emphasize the variety of
possible explanations for this disparity. For example, women with families
might prefer jobs that do not require overtime or high work intensity, or
there may be discrimination on the part of employers who view women
with children as less committed to their work. Budig and England (2001)
used the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to determine that U.S.
mothers received a penalty of about 7% of pay per child. About a third
of the penalty was explained by years of past experience and seniority.
However, the researchers called for further analysis of what accounts for the
other two-thirds of penalty not accounted for by experience and seniority.
Miller (2010) found for women who had a college degree or a managerial
occupation, delaying childbirth improved their career outcomes.

198

Career Development and Counseling

The wage gap related to having children appears to exist for women
in other developed countries, such as Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland,
the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands, as well as the United States.
However, ‘‘the challenges of meeting work and family obligations are
particularly problematic in the United States’’ (Waldfogel & McLanahan,
2011, p. 5). Speciﬁcally, in a study of the world’s most competitive economies,
the United States was found to be one of the few countries that does not
guarantee such beneﬁts as paid maternity and paternity leave or paid leave
to care for children who are ill (Earle, Mokomane, & Heymann, 2011). The
researchers in this study examined the 20 countries that have been the most
competitive over the past 8 to 10 years and added China and India to this
list as fast-rising competitors. All of these countries except the United States
guaranteed some form of paid leave for new mothers, and the United States
was one of two countries to not guarantee paid leave for fathers. Change in
such policies is necessary for parents to better balance family and work.
GENDER-RELATED EXPERIENCES IN THE WORKFORCE
Salary, Gender Segregation, and Comparable Worth
The most recent statistics from the U.S Department of Labor (2010) indicate
that women who worked full-time had median earnings that were 80% of
those earned by men. These percentages vary by race, with White women
having the most disparity compared with same-race men (79%), followed,
in order, by Asian American women (82%), Latina women (90%), and African
American women (94%). Wages vary by occupational group, and women
are employed in predominantly gender-traditional positions that pay considerably less than do gender-nontraditional positions. For example, women
currently are over 97% of preschool and elementary school teachers, 96%
of dental hygienists, 95% of childcare workers, 92% of typists and word
processors, 90% of hairdressers, 91% of receptionists, and 91% of teaching
assistants. Conversely, women are less than 2% of carpenters and electricians, 3% of construction workers, 7% of electrical engineers, and 10% of
computer engineers.
In nursing, which has made a concerted effort to ﬁll a critical need for more
nurses by recruiting men to the profession, men still account for only 8%
of registered nurses and 9% of licensed practical nurses. In teaching, where
there is a critical need for male role models (especially for young boys in
schools, with many households headed by single mothers), men account for
2% of preschool and kindergarten teachers and 8% of elementary and middle
school teachers. In addition to the common good that is served by bringing
talented men and women to nontraditional ﬁelds, for women there is the
added advantage that nontraditional ﬁelds pay 150% of what traditional

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

199

ﬁelds pay for occupations requiring a similar educational background (U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010). Thus despite some
progress in the last few decades regarding both salary disparities and
occupational segregation, much remains to be done to achieve occupational
integration and parity.
Comparable worth refers to the idea that when traditionally female occupations are judged comparable to jobs ﬁlled mostly by men, wages for both
positions should be the same. Comparable worth is an effort to examine
different job titles and to pay for them based on their inherent value to the
employer, regardless of the gender composition of the occupation. Genderneutral job evaluations have been created to assess the economic value
of different jobs. For example, secretarial and janitorial jobs are compared
on dimensions such as the (1) education or training required to perform
the job, (2) the severity or comfort of the working conditions, and (3) the
responsibility involved or the effort required to perform competently in the
position. These gender-neutral job evaluations differentiate legitimate wage
differences from those that are solely a function of the sex of the jobholder.
One area where there appears to be particularly high wage disparity is
care work. England, Budwig, and Folbre (2002) studied occupations that
involve caring for others, such as counseling, health professions, teaching,
and supervising children. Using panel data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth, they found that these occupations paid less than other
positions with similar education and employment criteria. As noted earlier,
these types of positions are female dominated; thus, this ﬁnancial devaluing
of the caring occupations is felt disproportionately by women.
Gender-Based Harassment
Sexual harassment has been identiﬁed as ‘‘one of the most damaging and
ubiquitous barriers to career success and satisfaction of women’’ (Willness,
Steel, & Lee, 2007, p. 127). There are two primary forms of sexual harassment.
Quid pro quo harassment is when job-related decisions are based on the
worker’s acceptance or rejection of unwelcome sexual behavior, such as
refusing to go out on a date. The other form is creating a hostile work
environment, which is an atmosphere where sexual behavior is offensive,
hostile, or intimidating, adversely affecting the employee’s ability to do his
or her job. An example would be environments where sexist comments and
jokes are communicated, even though the worker has indicated these are
unwelcome and unwanted.
In their meta-analysis of 41 studies of sexual harassment, Willness and colleagues (2007) found that sexual harassment and its consequences are evident
at all socioeconomic and educational levels, across cultures and countries,

200

Career Development and Counseling

and in all age groups and professions. Although sexual harassment occurs
in both genders, overwhelmingly women are the victims. For example, in
2010 the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) reported
that 84% of the complaints were from women. Studies indicate that sexual
harassment occurs in countries around the world, but few countries have
speciﬁc legislation protecting people from sexual harassment.
Few studies have been conducted on the experiences of men who are
sexually harassed in the workplace. Generally, men felt a great deal more in
control in the harassment situation and felt they could stop the harassment
if needed to a much greater extent than women tend to report. Some
men responded that they did not know sexual harassment could happen
to men. Some men identiﬁed a unique sexual harassment experience that
involved the negative stereotyping of men and punishment for deviating
from traditional gender roles (Berdahl, Magley, & Walkdo, 1996).
Studies have indicated that sexual harassment leads to a wide range of
psychological consequences, such as PTSD, depression, anger, fear, humiliation, and anxiety (Collinsworth, Fitzgerald, & Drasgow, 2009; Willness
et al., 2007). The attribution of blame has been found to be the leading
factor in predicting level of distress; the more sexual harassment survivors
blame themselves, the more distress is felt (Collinsworth et al., 2009). For
women of color, there appears to be an additive and interactive effect of
sexual harassment and racial harassment. In a study of 91 African American
women who had ﬁled lawsuits, researchers found that sexual harassment
was associated with psychological withdrawal from work and poorer life
satisfaction. Racial harassment accounted for additional variance (above and
beyond sexual harassment) in job stress, dissatisfaction with supervisors and
coworkers, and PTSD symptoms (Buchanan & Fitzgerald, 2008).
In sum, the impact and psychological consequences of sexual harassment
can be quite severe, both at the time of the offense and on a long-term basis.
Career counselors and vocational psychologists need to be able to recognize
and address harassment when it is relevant to clients’ presenting issues or
goals in counseling. There are also unique issues of harassment that affect the
GLBTQ community in the workplace (see Prince, Chapter 10, this volume).
Gender and Job Satisfaction
One of the great paradoxes of the career literature over the last few decades
is that even though women are paid less for the same work, suffer sexual
harassment and discrimination at higher levels than men, and work in
positions that are generally considered less attractive, they tend to report
greater job satisfaction than men in studies of U.S., Canadian, and European
workers (Clark, 1997; Donohue & Heywood, 2004; Sloane & Williams,

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

201

2000; Sousa-Poza & Sousa-Poza, 2000). Some have contended that this
phenomenon is due to the fact that women have lower expectations regarding
what they will gain from work and, thus, are more satisﬁed with less
(Clark, 1997). Others contend that it is the whole bundle of job-related
beneﬁts, including coworkers, effort required, job ﬂexibility, fringe beneﬁts,
overall working conditions, and intrinsic beneﬁts, that together are appealing
enough to overcome the negative aspects of lower salaries (Bender, Donahue,
& Heywood, 2005). (See Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this volume, for added
discussion of work satisfaction.)
Work and Family: Do They Conﬂict With or Enhance One Another?
With the majority of women and men now in the workforce, there has been
increasing attention to how work and family conﬂict with or enhance each
other. The original focus for this research was on role conﬂict. A quarter
century ago, Greenhaus and Beutell (1985) contributed a seminal paper on
how these two separate spheres of life compete for often scarce resources
of time and energy. More recently, researchers have begun to study the
ways in which work and family can also enrich, complement, or facilitate
one another (Barnett & Hyde, 2001; Gareis, Barnett, Ertel, & Berkman, 2009).
In essence, aspects of the work role can improve the quality of life in
the family role and vice versa. Carlson, Kacmar, Wayne, and Grzywacz
(2006) deﬁned work–family enrichment as occurring when resources and
experiences gained from one role improve role performance and quality of
life in the other role.
A closely related construct is that of family–work balance, which Greenhaus, Collins, and Shaw (2009) deﬁned as ‘‘the extent to which an individual
is equally engaged in—and equally satisﬁed with—his or her work role and
family role’’ (p. 513). They assessed three work–family balance concepts:
time balance, involvement balance, and satisfaction balance. In essence, they
found that those who spent more time on family roles than work roles
experienced a higher quality of life. How couples balance their work and
family roles and how these roles can enrich each other is an important area
for future research that could contribute to gender equity and a better quality
of life for both women and men.
Social class and level of wages earned may play a powerful role in how
work–family conﬂict or balance is experienced. For example, Richman (2006)
found that the constellation of lower wages, more part-time work, lack of
beneﬁts, and inﬂexible work schedules was associated with poorer work–life
balance among low-income families and single parents. Richman also found
that employers generally had little sympathy for their low-wage earners and
did not consider providing a more ﬂexible workplace. Thus, the multiple

202

Career Development and Counseling

roles of men and women, the social class group they are from, and their
family situation all impact how work and family life are experienced.
GENDER VALIDITY OF CAREER THEORIES
Theory is a critical guide for practice, and yet our traditional career theories
have come under increasing criticism for being ethnocentric; blind to culture,
gender, and class; and insensitive to changes in the modern occupational
world. It can be argued that many of these theories were developed and
validated when both gender roles and work roles were much different than
they are today. Thus, just as Young, Marshall, and Valach (2007) have argued
for culture-speciﬁc theory, there may very well be a need for gender-speciﬁc
theory that also accounts for the vast sociocultural differences of women
and men around the world. Perhaps most fundamentally, older theories that
focus on person and environment (P-E) ﬁt tend to ignore the dramatically
different socialization and lived experience of men and women, which
impact barriers and supports, the structure of opportunity, and, ultimately,
the choices that men and women feel they have in the occupational world.
By not explicitly recognizing and including gender in the building of theory,
the explanatory nature of the theory is diminished.
As noted earlier, in much of the world, men and women have relatively
little choice in their occupations—they work at whatever job they can get to
support themselves and their families. Thus, many individuals in the United
States and around the world are taking jobs without the luxury of considering
P-E ﬁt. In addition, it can be argued that many career development theories
tend to focus more on understanding the lives of middle- and upper-class
individuals rather than those with less volition in their vocational lives.
As one works with clients across class lines, it is critical to understand the
relevance of theories to each individual and her or his circumstances. It is,
therefore, crucial that the next generation of researchers and practitioners
(including those reading this book) think critically about the adequacy of
our theories for girls and boys and men and women around the world. This
section considers the gender-related validity of the major theories presented
in this text.
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment (TWA)
The Minnesota theory of work adjustment (TWA) can be generally helpful
to practitioners working with clients who need help with issues of career
adjustment, especially performance and satisfaction (see Swanson &
Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume). TWA emphasizes that persons exist
and behave in an environment. This focus on the context is a critically

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

203

important element of TWA. In essence, it is the reinforcers of a given work
environment—particularly the correspondence between the reinforcers of
the environment and what the individual man or woman values—that
lead to satisfaction and, ultimately, to longevity in a job, according
to TWA.
As we have seen from our review, many women face less than reinforcing
circumstances in their work environment, including such issues as sexual
harassment, glass ceilings and sticky ﬂoors, and salary discrepancies. Nontraditional men, men of color, gay men, and men of lower social classes
also experience many issues with work environments that do not explicitly
involve their values. TWA can help us help clients of both sexes to clarify
the correspondence of their values to the reinforcers in the work environment, their satisfactoriness to their employers, and their likely tenure in
the environment. Lyons and colleagues have suggested that the relation of
need-reinforcer correspondence to job satisfaction is substantial for African
American workers (Lyons & O’Brien, 2006) and LGB individuals (Lyons,
Brenner, & Fassinger, 2005). Further, their study of African American workers found that the positive relation of need-reinforcer correspondence and
job satisfaction was stronger than the negative relation of racial climate and
job satisfaction (Lyons & O’Brien, 2006). Despite these ﬁndings, the theory
does not explicitly account for factors apart from values and skills that
may affect job tenure (e.g., economic downsizing); neither does it consider
gender-related barriers and discrimination experiences that can affect work
satisfaction and adjustment.
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Personalities
and Work Environments
Holland’s theory (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume) continues to provide a
simple and elegant language for understanding self and career. However, it
is critical for practitioners to be aware that raw score inventories, such as the
Self-Directed Search (see Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume), may inadvertently encourage gender-stereotypic choices. For example, if a woman has
been most able to work in clerical jobs because of the structure of occupational opportunity, she is likely to score high on the conventional activities
because that is what she knows. Conventional activities typically are still
primarily female dominated and lower paid. As indicated earlier, 92% of
typists and word processors are women. Thus, career practitioners need to
use care when they interpret this information to clients, help them understand the potential reasons for their Holland code results, and encourage
consideration of options that will help them gain skills in areas that may be
more reﬂective of what they can do rather than what they have previously

204

Career Development and Counseling

done. Interest inventories that provide gender-based norms can also be used
to encourage consideration of nonstereotypic options.
Another critical point from a gender perspective is that women’s career
development tends (more than men’s) to be less directed by sheer passion
or interest for an occupation (Spokane & Cruza-Guet, 2005) and to be more
constrained by barriers within the occupational structure. Thus, when using
Holland theory with girls and women, it is important to look beyond interests
alone and to consider the host of other variables that may be inﬂuencing
occupational preferences (e.g., ability to work in a ﬁeld that allows greater
ﬂexibility for child rearing).
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and Compromise
The theory of circumscription and compromise (Gottfredson, 2005) emphasizes conditions that may constrain career choices, such as the perceived sex
appropriateness, context, power differentials, and prestige associated with
various choice options. The theory proposes that, from an early age, boys and
girls tend to view careers primarily in terms of femininity-masculinity and
prestige level. Thus, the self-deﬁned social spaces within the cognitive map
of occupations become highly restricted. This theoretical framework can be
very helpful in working with boys and girls on career choice issues. Helping
young people understand how their choices may have been circumscribed
and compromised is an important step in helping them make more authentic
choices. Using this information to help young people reconsider and explore
occupational options that they have earlier ruled out may also be a valuable
activity, especially in cases where they may be constraining their choices to
gender-stereotypic options.
Super’s Developmental Theory and Career Construction Theory
Super’s original theory (Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume) has been modiﬁed
and expanded in critical ways over a number of decades. Savickas’s career
construction theory (Chapter 6, this volume) has evolved from Super’s
developmental theory; thus, both theories are reviewed together in this
section. Super’s theory is particularly important from a gender perspective
in that it recognizes that career development involves more than a choice of
occupation and instead a fundamental understanding of how work interacts
with different life roles. Thus, issues of motherhood or child-rearing roles
can be integrated and understood within this theory. Super’s theory has also
been inﬂuential in helping career counselors and vocational psychologists
understand that career development is not a one-time event but rather a
process that plays out over time.

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

205

Savickas’s theory development underscores that our identities are shaped
by our social contexts, including culture, gender, and social class. His theory
focuses on how one develops one’s own life narrative and how that narrative
is shaped by the social context. Thus, this theory can be used to help focus the
client on the subjective aspects of the career development process. As with
other postmodern approaches, career constructivist theory maintains that
there is no ﬁxed truth and that individuals construct their own truths and
their own realities (Niles & Harris-Bowlsbey, 2005). This places individuals
in the position of being active agents in creating their own life stories. How
gender helps to shape the life narrative for both men and women is a topic
that can aid the ﬁeld to understand the subjective and culture-bound nature
of career development and, more broadly, the role of work in people’s lives.
Social Cognitive Career Theory
Perhaps no theory has helped the ﬁeld of vocational psychology and career
counseling understand the vocational development of girls and women as
much as social cognitive career theory (SCCT; see Lent, Chapter 5, this
volume). SCCT explicitly incorporates gender as a person input and also
attends to ‘‘background contextual affordances’’ that affect individuals’
learning experiences. These experiences help to shape self-efﬁcacy and
outcome expectations, which, in turn, inﬂuence interests and goals. This
theory has been helpful in guiding research as well as practice. For example,
counselors can use the theory to explore how previous learning has affected
the client’s self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, and interests. SCCT can
also be used to focus on environmental barriers and supports that can
affect women’s and men’s ability to pursue their preferred choices. Like
Gottfredson’s theory, SCCT can also be used to help people reexplore
occupational options that they might have earlier ruled out on the basis
of inaccurate self-efﬁcacy beliefs or outcome expectations. As mentioned
earlier, SCCT has been used as the theoretical base for a great deal of research
on STEM career ﬁelds (e.g., Fouad & Smith, 1996; Lent, Lopez, Lopez, &
Sheu, 2008). A portion of this research has speciﬁcally examined factors that
can affect women’s pursuit of STEM careers.
IMPLICATIONS FOR COUNSELORS
It may be concluded that many of our career theories are useful in aiding
men and women to ﬁnd and prosper in satisfying work as long as counselors
using these theories incorporate an exploration of gender-related barriers
that prevent many people from achieving full labor force participation and
work satisfaction. It is also important, as pointed out by Gottfredson’s theory

206

Career Development and Counseling

of circumscription and compromise and SCCT, to help clients identify and
explore occupational options that they may have ruled out on the basis of
restricted sex role views, unrealistically low self-efﬁcacy beliefs, or inaccurate
outcome expectations. Finally, as shown by research on SCCT and by Brown
and Ryan Krane (2000), it is critical to help clients build supports that can
facilitate their ability to enter and prosper in satisfying occupations.
However, it also appears clear from the material presented in this chapter
that, although some areas of the workplace have experienced greater gender
equity, we have a very long way to go. Practitioners can play a key role
in promoting discussion of gender equity issues within career counseling.
Because many young people hold the belief that gender inequity was
resolved in the last century, they are often ill prepared for the realities of
today’s workplace. Thus, it seems critical to promote discussions of issues
such as discrimination against men and women in nontraditional careers,
occupational segregation, salary differentials, and the role of implicit gender
role socialization in the continuing choices of men and women.
Examining the Implicit and Explicit Biases Shaping Our Work
The ﬁrst and most important task may be to examine our own biases and
ingrained messages about gender and work. The investigations that have
examined bias with implicit methodologies make it clear that even very welleducated counselors can still carry implicit messages about men and women
that may affect their behavior. It may be difﬁcult to accept that being raised
in a society with occupational stereotyping and differential perceptions
of competence in men and women can prime us unconsciously to think
and act in certain ways. Thus, it takes our constant vigilance to observe
and acknowledge how and in what form these unconscious biases present
themselves in our work with men and women in our career counseling
practices. It is probably the most basic piece of advice: that counselors must
know themselves, their own prejudices and biases, the way they hold and
use power, and the way they are controlled by others. Counselors must be
aware of how racism, sexism, heterosexism, and all the other isms affect
their attitudes and behaviors. This deep and sometimes painful learning and
reﬂection is critical to being able to empower others to look at the impact of
these forces in their lives.
Empowering Men and Women to Pursue Gender Equity
In working with individual clients for the goal of gender equality, perhaps
the most important aspect of the work is empowerment. I use McWhirter
and colleagues’ deﬁnition of empowerment: The process by which people,

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

207

organizations or groups who are powerless or marginalized (a) become aware of the
power dynamics at work in their life contexts, (b) develop the skills and capacity for
gaining some reasonable control over their lives, (c) which they exercise, (d) without
infringing on the rights of others, and (e) which coincides with actively supporting the
empowerment of others in their community (Chronister, McWhirter, & Forrest,
2006, p. 170). The model that McWhirter developed in 1994 and reﬁned
with her colleagues can be used to help empower marginalized peoples
to work for change within their own lives and communities. This ‘‘critical
feminist’’ approach can, moreover, be used with diverse people—especially
women and men of color, immigrants, lesbians and gay men, people living
in poverty, and people with disabilities—and is consistent with the social
justice goals of the career counseling profession.
McWhirter’s model includes ﬁve central tenets, the ﬁve C’s of collaboration,
competence, context, critical consciousness, and community. Collaboration
emphasizes that the counselor and client work together to establish the
goals of counseling, the tasks that will help to achieve those goals, and the
relationship or bond between them. Competence emphasizes the importance of recognizing and using clients’ skills and helping them develop new
skills. The tenet of competence is rooted in the idea that every client comes
with strengths and that we should emphasize these rather than looking for
pathology and weakness. Context acknowledges that all vocational behavior
is an act in context and as such is intertwined with one’s ecological system. Critical consciousness involves the dual processes of power analysis
(identifying how power is manifest in a person’s life context) and critical
self-reﬂection (generating awareness of how people can transform power
dynamics). McWhirter (1994) also emphasizes the importance of counselors
developing their own critical consciousness. She suggests this can be done
through studying the multicultural literature, having cross-cultural experiences, talking with people from different communities, and engaging in
intense self-reﬂection. Finally, community entails helping people ﬁnd others
with the goal of receiving and providing support.
Gender Mainstreaming: A Useful Lens for Career Counselors
The concept of gender mainstreaming was endorsed by the United Nations
(United Nations Ofﬁce of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, 2002) as a strategy for implementing the goal of gender
parity in its programs and services around the world. Gender mainstreaming
is deﬁned as ‘‘planned action, including legislation, policies or programs,
in all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well
as men’s concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programs in all

208

Career Development and Counseling

political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men beneﬁt
equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to achieve
gender equality’’ (p. 1).
Although the scope of the work is different, it may be highly useful for
career counselors to use this lens of gender mainstreaming to examine all
aspects of the work we do, the theories we use, the policies of our agencies,
the training of counselors who work in our settings, the resources we use,
and the work of our national associations—all with the ultimate goal of
providing counseling and other services that promote gender equity.
Working for Broader Systemic Change
Although many of these suggestions have been at the individual level
because that is the level at which most career counselors work, it is critical to
understand that the systemic changes needed to bring about gender equality
go well beyond what can happen with an individual client. However, career
development professionals can be part of systemic change through our communities, political structures, lobbying of policy makers, communications
with media, and schools and workplaces. Career professionals possess specialized expertise concerning the vocationally related systems-level changes
needed to bring about gender equality. In essence, career professionals can
serve as advocates of social and policy change that can have sweeping effects
far beyond their work with individual clients.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
How the role of gender differentially impacts the vocational lives of women
and men around the world has been the focus of this chapter. It is critical
that career counselors and vocational psychologists not attempt to conduct
research, develop theory, or create practice interventions that are genderblind. The dramatic statistics presented at the beginning of this chapter
reﬂect the disparities in educational and career-related issues in the lives of
men and women. The challenge becomes how we can both understand and
effectively intervene in the lives of men and women to aid them in seeking
the best life quality they can achieve. Our theories can serve as important
guides in this process, but as I argue in this chapter, career counselors
need to think critically about the gender validity of these theories and
use them with prudence and vigilance. Our role as career counselors and
vocational scientists is a sacred trust, one in which our sensitivity, theoretical
knowledge, and applied expertise can make a critical difference in the lives
of women and men as we help them ﬁnd meaningful work.

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

209

This chapter has highlighted the myriad ways that gender impacts career
development. Career counselors working with girls and boys and men and
women must understand both the blatant and subtle ways that gender
bias exists and inﬂuences career choice and adjustment. Here are several speciﬁc recommendations for practice based on the review of current
literature:
• Understand one’s own implicit and explicit assumptions about gender

that may inﬂuence aspects of the career counseling process.
• Understand that, even though much more has been written about the

impact of gender on women’s career development, both women and
men face subtle and blatant discrimination based on gender.
• Help clients understand how their own implicit and explicit assumptions
about gender may be inﬂuencing their own career development.
• Help clients develop strategies to deal with gender-related bias, prejudice, sexism, and discrimination.
• Help clients understand how the social construction of gender may
impact their perceptions about career choice and adjustment, including
what careers they deem appropriate.
• Help clients understand the role of math as a critical ﬁlter to many career
choices.
• Help clients understand that although there has been progress in the
area of gender equality, there is still occupational segregation, gender
role stereotyping of careers, sexual harassment, and lack of comparable
pay for comparable jobs.
• Examine the potential gap men and women have between their aspirations and expectations.
• Recognize which theories are most helpful in guiding gender-aware
career counseling.
REFERENCES
Anselmi, D. L., & Law, A. L. (1998). Questions of gender. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Arredondo, P., & Perez, P. (2003). Expanding multicultural competence through
social justice leadership. Counseling Psychologist, 31, 282–289.
Barnett, R. C., & Hyde, J. S. (2001). Women, men, work, and family: An expansionist
theory. American Psychologist, 56, 781–796.
Bell, L. A. (1997). Theoretical foundations for social justice education. In M. Adams,
L. A. Bell, & P. Grifﬁn (Eds.), Teaching for diversity and social justice: A sourcebook
(pp. 3–15). New York, NY: Routledge.
Bender, K. A., Donahue, S. M., & Heywood, J. S. (2005). Job satisfaction and gender
segregation. Oxford Economic Papers, 57, 479–496.

210

Career Development and Counseling

Berdahl, J. L., Magley, V. J., & Walkdo, C. R. (1996). The sexual harassment of men?
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20, 527–547.
Betz, N. E. (1994). Career counseling for women in the sciences and engineering.
In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Career counseling for women (pp. 237–262).
New York, NY: Routledge.
Betz, N. E. (2006). Basic issues and concepts in the career development and counseling
women. In W. B. Walsh & M. J. Heppner (Eds.), Handbook of career counseling for
women (2nd ed., pp. 45–74). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L (2011). A relational theory of working. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
79, 1–17.
Boaler, J., & Irving, T. S. (2007). Mathematics. In B. Banks (Ed.), Gender and education:
An encyclopedia (pp. 287–293). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Brooks, G. R., & Good, G. E. (2001). The new handbook of psychotherapy and counseling
with men: A comprehensive guide to settings, problems and treatment approaches. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or ﬁve) sessions and a cloud of dust:
Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766). New
York: Wiley.
Buchanan, N. T., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (2008). Effects of racial and sexual harassment
on work and the psychological well-being of African American Women. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology, 13, 137–151. doi:10.1037/1076-8998.13.2.137
Budig, M. J., & England, P. (2001). The wage penalty for motherhood. American
Sociological Review, 66(2), 204–225.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2009). Women in the labor force: A databook. Retrieved from
http://www.bls.gov/cps/wlf-intro-2009.htm
Butler, D. (2000). Gender, girls, and computer technology: What’s the status now?
Clearing House, 73(4), 225.
Care, E., Deans, J., & Brown, R. (2007). The realism and sex type of four- to ﬁveyear-old children’s occupational aspirations. Journal of Early Childhood Research, 5,
155–168. doi:10.1177/1476718X07076681
Carlson, D. S., Kacmar, K. M., Wayne, J. H., & Grzywacz, J. G. (2006). Measuring the positive side of the work–family interface: Development and validation of a work–family enrichment scale. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68,
131–164.
Ceci, S. J., Williams, W. M., & Barnett, S. M. (2009). Women’s underrepresentation
in science: Sociocultural and biological considerations. Psychological Bulletin, 135,
218–261.
Chronister, K. M., McWhirter, E. H., & Forrest, L. (2006). A critical feminist approach
to career counseling with women. In W. B. Walsh & M. J. Heppner (Eds.), Handbook
of career counseling for women (2nd ed., pp. 167–192). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88–352, 78 Stat. 241 (1964).
Clark, A. (1997) Why are women so happy at work? Labour Economics, 4, 341–372.

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

211

Collinsworth, L. L., Fitzgerald, F. L., & Drasgow, F. (2009) In harm’s way: Factors
related to psychological distress following sexual harassment. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 33(4), 475–490. doi:10.1111/j.1471-6402.2009.01525.x
Correll, S. J. (2001). Gender and the career choice process: The role of biased
self-assessments. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 1691–1730.
Division for the Advancement of Women. (2000). The four global women’s conferences 1975–1995: Historical perspective. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/
womenwatch/daw/followup/session/presskit/hist.htm
Donohue, S., & Heywood, J. (2004). Job satisfaction, comparison income and gender:
Evidence from the NLSY. International Journal of Manpower, 25, 211–234.
Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2000). Aversive racism and selection decisions:
1989–1999. Psychological Sciences, 11, 315–319.
Earle, A., Mokomane, Z., & Heymann, J. (2011). International perspectives on
work–family policies: Lessons from the world’s most competitive economies. The
Future of Children, 21, 191–203.
Eccles, J. S. (2007). Where are all the women? Gender differences in participations
in physical sciences and engineering. In S. J. Ceci & W. M. Williams (Eds.), Why
aren’t more women in science? Top researchers debate the evidence (pp. 199–210).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (2010). Cross-national patterns of
gender differences in mathematics: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
103–127.
England, P., Budwig, M., & Folbre, N. (2002). Wages of virtue: The relative pay of
care work. Social Problems, 49, 455–473.
Fassinger, R. E., & Asay, P. A. (2006). Career counseling for women in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) ﬁelds. In W. B. Walsh &
M. J. Heppner (Eds.), Handbook of career counseling for women (2nd ed., pp. 427–452).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Flores, L. Y., Navarro, R. L., Smith, J., & Plojaz, A. (2006). Testing a model of career
choice with Mexican American adolescent boys. Journal of Career Assessment, 14,
214–234.
Fouad, N. A., & Smith, P. L. (1996). A test of the social cognitive model for
middle school students: Math and science. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45,
403–415.
Gareis, K. C., Barnett, R. C., Ertel, K. A., & Berkman, L. F. (2009). Work–family
enrichment and conﬂict: Additive effects, buffering, or balance? Journal of Marriage
and Family, 71, 696–707.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Greenhaus, J. H., & Beutell, N. J. (1985). Sources of conﬂict between work and family
roles. Academy of Management Review, 10, 76–88.
Greenhaus, J. H., Collins, K. M., & Shaw, J. D. (2009). The relations between
work–family balance and quality of life. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 63, 510–531.

212

Career Development and Counseling

Greenwald, A. G., & Nosek, B. A. (2001). Health of the Implicit Association Test at
age 3. Zeitschrift für Experimentelle Psychologie, 48, 85–93.
Gysbers, N. C., Heppner, M. J., & Johnston, J. A. (2009). Career counseling: Contexts,
process and techniques. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Hausmann, R., Tyson, L. D., & Zahidi, S. (2010). The global gender gap report. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Economic Forum.
Heppner, M. J., & Heppner, P. P. (2001). The implications of male socialization for
career counseling. In G. Brooks & G. Good (Eds.), A new handbook of counseling and
psychotherapy approaches for men. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hill, S. T., & Johnson, J. M. (2004). Science and engineering degrees 1966–2001.
Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov
/statistics/nsf04311/
Jome, L. M., & Tokar, D. M. (1998). Dimensions of masculinity and major choice
traditionality. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 52, 120–134.
Lease, S. H. (2003). Testing a model of men’s nontraditional occupational choices.
Career Development Quarterly, 51, 244–258.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 45, 79–122.
Lent, R. W., Lopez, A. M., Lopez, F. G., & Sheu, H. B. (2008). Social cognitive theory
and the prediction of interest and choice goals in the computing disciplines.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73, 52–62.
Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2006). Math-science expertise study of mathematically
precocious youth after 35 years: Uncovering antecedents for the development of
math-science expertise. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1, 316–339.
Lyons, H. Z., Brenner, B. R., & Fassinger, R. (2005). A multicultural test of the theory
of work adjustment: Investigating the role of heterosexism and ﬁt perceptions in
the job satisfaction of lesbian, gay, and bisexual employees. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 52, 537–548.
Lyons, H. Z., & O’Brien, K. M. (2006). The role of person–environment ﬁt in the
job satisfaction and tenure intentions of African American employees. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 53, 387–396.
McWhirter, E. W. (1994). Counseling for empowerment. Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association.
Miller, A. R. (2010). The effects of motherhood timing on career path. Journal of
Population Economics, 24, 1–30. doi:10.1007/s00148-009-0296-x
National Science Foundation. (2007). Women, minorities and persons with disabilities in
science and engineering: 2007 (NFS 07–315). Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov
/statistics/women/
Niles, S. G., & Harris-Bowlsbey, J. (2005). Career development interventions in the 21st
century (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
O’Brien, K. M., Friedman S. M., Tipton, L. C., & Linn, S. G. (2000). Attachment,
separation and women’s vocational development: A longitudinal analysis. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 47, 301–315.

Women, Men, and Work: The Long Road to Gender Equity

213

O’Neil, J. M. (2008). Summarizing twenty-ﬁve years of research on men’s genderrole conﬂict using the Gender Role Conﬂict Scale: New research paradigms and
clinical implications. Counseling Psychologist, 36, 358–476.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2002). Women at work:
Who are they and how are they faring? In OECD Employment Outlook 2002
(pp. 61–125). doi:10.1787/empl_outlook-2002-en
Pew Research Center. (2010). The new demography of American motherhood.
Retrieved from http://pewsocialtrends.org/ﬁles/2010/10/754-new-demogra
phy-of-motherhood.pdf
Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives: A location for counseling psychologists. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 425–433.
Richman, P. (2006). Work stress and health and socioeconomic status. Retrieved
from http://www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources/publications/factsheet-wsh.aspx.
Rochlen, A. B., McKelley, R. A., Suizzo, M.-A., & Scaringi, V. (2008). Predictors
of relationship satisfaction, psychological well-being and life satisfaction among
stay-at-home fathers. Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 9(1), 17–28.
Schultheiss, D. E. P. (2009). To mother or to matter: Can women do both? Journal of
Career Development, 36, 25–48. doi:10.1177/0894845309340795
Sloane, P. J., & Williams, H. (2000). Job satisfaction, comparison earnings and gender.
Labour, 14, 473–502.
Sousa-Poza, A., & Sousa-Poza, A. (2000). Taking another look at the gender/job
satisfaction paradox. KYKLOS, 53, 135–152.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype threat and women’s
math performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 4–28.
Spokane, A. R., & Crusa-Guet, M. C. (2005). Holland’s theory of vocational personalities in work environments. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development
and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 24–41). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Stangor, C., & Shaller, M. (1996). Stereotypes as individual and collective representations. In C. Macrae, C. Stangor, & M. Hewstone (Eds.), Stereotypes and stereotyping
(pp. 3–40). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Tokar, D. M., & Jome, L. M. (1998). Masculinity, vocational interests, and career
choice traditionality: Evidence for a fully mediated model. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 45, 424–435.
United Nations, Ofﬁce of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women. (2002). Gender mainstreaming: An overview. New York, NY: United
Nations.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2010). Women in the labor force,
a data book. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (2009). Sexual harassment.
Retrieved from http://archive.eeoc.gov/types/sexual_harassment.html
Waldfogel, J., & McLanahan, S. (2011). Work and family: Introducing the issue. The
Future of Children, 21, 3–14.
Walsh, B., & Heppner, M. J. (2006). Handbook of career counseling of women. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

214

Career Development and Counseling

White, M. J., & White, G. B. (2006). Implicit and explicit occupational gender
stereotypes. Sex Roles, 55, 259–266.
Willness, C. R., Steel, P., & Lee, K. (2007). A meta-analysis of the antecedents and
consequences of workplace sexual harassment. Personnel Psychology, 60, 127–162.
Young, R. A., Marshall, S. K., & Valach, L. (2007). Making career theories more
culturally sensitive: Implications for counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 56,
4–18.

CHAPTER 8

The Role of Race and Ethnicity
in Career Choice, Development,
and Adjustment
NADYA A. FOUAD AND NEETA KANTAMNENI

I

N AN IDEAL WORLD, every individual would be free to choose the optimal

occupation for himself or herself, have the resources to pursue that
occupational dream, and successfully implement that goal. That is, in a
nutshell, the American dream, which James Truslow Adams (1931) deﬁned
as the ‘‘dream of a land in which life should be better and richer and fuller
for every [person], with opportunity for each according to ability or achievement’’ (p. 404). This deﬁnition implies that each person’s ability should be
the sole determinant of his or her success and that opportunity should be
available to all to seek that success. Career counseling grew out of efforts at
the beginning of the 20th century to help recent immigrants and others with
limited resources achieve the American dream (Flores, 2009).
However, then as well as today, the fundamental assumptions underlying
this notion of an ideal world may not ﬁt the worldviews of some individuals,
may not be available as a dream for other individuals, and may not be
possible for still others. Not everyone makes decisions about work based
on their abilities. Opportunities available to individuals, and their resources
to take advantage of those opportunities, differ dramatically by social class
and race/ethnicity. And ﬁnally, not everyone’s dream to be better and fuller
is achieved through work, and not everyone has a dream to be richer.
Dreams and expectations about work and career are very much shaped by
individuals’ cultural expectations and by the society in which they live. It
is critical, therefore, for vocational psychologists and career counselors to
have an understanding of the role that cultural context plays in helping to
215

216

Career Development and Counseling

form perceptions of work, in the factors that go into decision making about
work, and in the ways that counselors can help clients with career- and
work-related concerns.
We focus on one aspect of cultural expectations in this chapter, that of racial
and ethnic background. Other chapters will provide a review of research
and recommendations for other contextual inﬂuences, such as gender and
social class. It is important to provide a critical lens on speciﬁc aspects
of culture to help elucidate research and practice due to those speciﬁc
inﬂuences. However, we have argued elsewhere (Fouad & Kantamneni,
2008) that it is important to understand the multiple contextual inﬂuences
on work- and career-related choices. Thus, we encourage readers to note
that although these chapters focus on various aspects of cultural context
separately, in reality individuals are inﬂuenced by multiple contextual
inﬂuences simultaneously.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst provide some background on the role of
racial/ethnic disparities in educational and occupational attainment to
provide a basis for our argument that it is important to understand the role
of racial/ethnic background in understanding inﬂuences on individuals’
career- and work-related decisions. We then review the available research
from the past decade on the cultural validity of many of the major
vocational theories, including those presented in Chapters 2 through 6 of
this volume. Following this review, we consider recent research on speciﬁc
culture-relevant factors that have been shown to differ across racial/ethnic
groups, such as barriers and supports, the role of racism, acculturation,
and the role salience of the worker role. Although some of the research
we discuss has been tied to speciﬁc theoretical perspectives (e.g., barriers
and supports are featured in social cognitive career theory; role salience is
a central construct in Super’s theory of career development), much of the
research on race/ethnicity in relation to career behavior has not been tied
to a particular theoretical framework. Finally, we focus on the implications
of this research for practitioners and end with recommendations for both
researchers and practitioners.
EDUCATIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL DISPARITIES
A great deal has been written about the large disparities in educational
and occupational attainment between White European Americans and individuals from racial/ethnic minority backgrounds. The data clearly indicate
that racial/ethnic minority individuals are disproportionately likely to drop
out of high school, not complete college, and be overrepresented in lowerpaying and lower-skilled occupations (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011).
There has also been much written about the causes of these educational and

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

217

occupational disparities. We will not revisit those debates here and instead
focus on the consequences of disparities on occupational outcomes.
First, it is important to understand the proportion of various racial/ethnic
groups in the United States. The 2010 census contains the most recent data
collected on individuals’ self-identiﬁcation of racial/ethnic group membership (Census Bureau, 2011). Individuals could identify as Hispanic/Latino
(as an ethnicity) and also could identify as a member of a racial category.
This is a recent change in census data collection that recognizes that those
of South or Central American descent may belong to many different racial
groups. The percentage of individuals identifying as White, non-Hispanic,
was 63.7%, continuing a downward trend that has been apparent since the
1970 census (i.e., the percentage of those identifying as White has decreased
from 87% in 1970 to 83% in 1980 to 80% in 1990 and 69% in 2000; Gibson &
Jung, 2002).
Those identifying as Hispanic/Latino in 2010 grew the most of any
racial/ethnic group to 16.3% from 12.6% in 2000 (Census Bureau, 2011).
Those identifying as Black/African American, American Indian or Native
American, Asian or Paciﬁc Islander, and Other race represented, respectively,
12.6%, 0.9%, 4.8%, and 5.5% of the population. Finally, 2.4% of the population
identiﬁed as belonging to two or more races. Geographically, racial/ethnic
diversity has increased across all regions of the United States, suggesting
that career counselors across the country are very likely to be called upon
to serve clients who represent racial/ethnic backgrounds different than
their own.
We noted earlier that poorer educational and occupational outcomes are
disproportionately represented among racial/ethnic minorities relative to
their numbers in the population. For example, in 2008, 3,118,000 individuals
dropped out of high school; 34% percent of those were African American,
and 40% were Hispanic (U.S. Department of Education, Institute on Education Sciences, 2011). There are also racial/ethnic disparities in the numbers of
those graduating from high school. In 2009, 87.1% of Whites had completed
high school by the time they were 25; these ﬁgures were somewhat lower for
African Americans (84.1%), about the same (88.2%) for Asian Americans, and
substantially lower (61.9%) for Hispanics. These racial/ethnic educational
disparities become even more pronounced in considering college completion rates. In 2009, nearly 30% of all Whites and slightly more than 52%
of Asian Americans over the age of 25 had completed college, but only
slightly more than 19% of African Americans and 13% of Hispanics had
completed college (U.S. Department of Education, Institute on Education
Sciences, 2011).
As may be expected, these educational disparities also play out in occupational attainment. Although racial/ethnic groups do not differ markedly

218

Career Development and Counseling

in their overall participation in the workforce, with about 66% of Whites,
62.4% of African Americans, 66% of Asians, and 68% of Hispanics in the
civilian labor force in 2009 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011), they do differ
in the types of occupations in which they are employed. African Americans and Hispanics are underrepresented in management and professional
occupations and overrepresented in food preparation, building cleaning,
transportation, and service occupations (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011).
Asian Americans are overrepresented in scientiﬁc and engineering occupations and underrepresented in many service occupations (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2011).
Occupational disparities grow exponentially in light of the implications
of educational attainment and type of occupation in the recent economic
recession. In June 2011, the unemployment rate nationally was 9.2% but
only 8.7% for Whites and 7.5% for Asians, yet 16% for African Americans
and 11.6% for Hispanics (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011). And those
in blue-collar positions, in which Hispanics and African Americans are
overrepresented, were more likely to lose their jobs than those in white-collar
professions (Economic Policy Institute, 2010).
The statistics presented here highlight the differences in educational and
occupational outcomes for racial/ethnic minority clients and students. These
differences may have resulted from individual choices but may also represent
choices constrained by structural barriers to educational and occupational
attainment. Each individual’s career and work choices are shaped by his or
her cultural context, and racial/ethnic background is a large component of
that context. Understanding the role of race and ethnicity in work and career
decision making is a critically important part of cultural competence for all
researchers and practitioners.
CROSS-CULTURAL VALIDITY OF CAREER THEORIES
In this section, we discuss the role that race and ethnicity may play in
most of the major career theories and also review research on race and
ethnicity that has been conducted in relation to these theoretical perspectives.
We acknowledge that some scholars (e.g., Leong & Pearce, 2011; Young,
Marshall, & Valach, 2007) have exhorted the ﬁeld to build theories from
within each culture’s perspective, rather than trying to make existing theories
more culturally relevant. We agree with them, but we also believe it is
important to examine the cultural validity of the major career theories.
Holland’s Theory
Holland’s theory (1997) asserts that career choice is an expression of an
individual’s personality. Holland argues that cultural and personal factors

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

219

work together to create distinctive personality types; in turn, environments
are also characterized by personality types. People and their environments
may be described in terms of six basic personality and environment types
(Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising, and Conventional).
The main premise in Holland’s theory is to help people understand their
personality types in order to ﬁnd a match with work environments (see
Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume). A strong match between an individual’s
personality and his or her work environment is hypothesized to be related
to job satisfaction and job tenure.
Extensive research has examined the cross-cultural validity of Holland’s
theory. This line of research has examined whether the six vocational personality types exist and correspond to Holland’s hypothesized RIASEC
pattern in various cultural groups, whether cultural variables predict vocational interests, and whether key tenets proposed by Holland (e.g., congruence) are applicable in cross-cultural populations. Numerous studies
have investigated whether vocational interests fall in a RIASEC pattern;
several methodologically rigorous studies have found similar structures of
the six interest types for the major ethnic groups (e.g., Armstrong, Hubert,
& Rounds, 2003; Day & Rounds, 1998; Tracey & Rounds, 1993) with a
few exceptions. For example, Flores, Spanierman, Armstrong, and Velez
(2006) found that adult Latinos did not have a circular RIASEC ordering,
and Kantamneni and Fouad (2011) found that African American females
and Latino males did not possess a circular RIASEC ordering, suggesting
that the perceived structure of the world of work may be different for
these groups.
Research has provided limited evidence that cultural variables predict
vocational interests. In an investigation of the vocational interests of South
Asian Americans, Kantamneni and Fouad (in press) found that acculturation
predicted Realistic interests and that individualistic and collectivistic values
predicted Social interests. Participants who identiﬁed more strongly with
their South Asian cultural background had higher Realistic interests, those
who possessed strong individualistic values measured low in Social interests,
and those with stronger collectivistic values reported higher Social interests.
Similarly, Tang, Fouad, and Smith (1999) found that family inﬂuences and
acculturation predicted vocational interests for Asian American college
students. Asian Americans who were Anglo-acculturated displayed atypical
interests.
Relatively little research has examined key tenets proposed by Holland
(e.g., congruence, differentiation) within diverse racial/ethnic populations.
A meta-analysis conducted by Tsabari, Tziner, and Meir (2005) found that
culture moderated the relationship between congruence and job satisfaction;
participants from individualistic societies displayed a stronger relationship

220

Career Development and Counseling

between interest congruence and satisfaction than did those from collectivist
societies. Leong, Austin, Sekaran, and Komarraju (1998) examined the career
choices of adult workers in India. They found that congruence, differentiation, and consistency were not predictive of job satisfaction, suggesting
cross-cultural limitations for Holland’s theory. In studies examining how
cultural variables predict congruence for South Asian American college students, Gupta and Tracey (2005) and Kantamneni and Fouad (in press) each
found that cultural factors, such as dharma, Asian values, and collectivistic
values, did not affect congruence between expressed and measured interests.
Considering the mixed ﬁndings as to whether interests fall within Holland’s proposed structure and whether key tenets proposed by Holland
are applicable to diverse populations, several criticisms of Holland’s theory
have been offered. First, despite Holland’s having listed barriers and lack
of resources as among the factors that affect congruence–outcome relations,
research on Holland’s theory has largely ignored the barriers and limited
opportunities faced by many individuals (Hardin, 2007). Second, Holland’s
theory does not explicitly address the role of culture in developing vocational identities, and the few studies in this area have found contradictory
evidence as to how cultural variables affect vocational interests. No research
to date has investigated how cultural variables affect vocational interest
development. Third, Holland’s theory does not pay marked attention to
the various societal inﬂuences that may affect how an individual perceives
his or her environment (Hardin, 2007). Discrimination, barriers, or other
forms of prejudice in the workplace may affect how work environments are
experienced.
In sum, much of the research examining the cultural validity of Holland’s
theory has provided evidence for its use with diverse populations. However,
some studies (e.g., Flores et al., 2006b; Kantamneni & Fouad, 2011) have
not found a circular or hexagonal RIASEC pattern of interests for speciﬁc
racial/ethnic groups, and the research examining the direct and indirect
inﬂuence of cultural variables on vocational interests and other important
constructs (e.g., congruence, differentiation) in Holland’s theory is limited.
More research is needed to reach deﬁnitive conclusions as to whether
Holland’s theory is an appropriate and valid theoretical framework for
people of color in the United States.
The Theory of Work Adjustment
The theory of work adjustment (TWA) is a person–environment ﬁt model
that predicts how well individuals will adjust to their job environments
(Dawis, 2005). The model focuses on how well individuals’ abilities match
the abilities required by the job (e.g., individuals’ satisfactoriness) and how

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

221

well individuals’ needs and work values are met by the reinforcers in the
environment (e.g., individuals’ satisfaction). If individuals are both satisﬁed
and satisfactory, they are predicted to stay in the job environment (see
Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume).
The theory is based on an individual differences perspective, a perspective
that Dawis (1994) embraced as viewing ‘‘people as individuals and not as
members of groups’’ (p. 41). He noted that focusing on group membership
was an inaccurate way to estimate abilities and needs and recommended
instead that researchers focus on individuals’ reinforcement history. In
essence, he predicted that race and ethnicity inﬂuence person–environment
ﬁt, which in turn inﬂuences a person’s job satisfaction. Rounds and Hesketh
(1994), however, argued the importance of making explicit the effect of
race and ethnicity on work adjustment, particularly for variables, such as
discrimination, that may moderate an individual’s satisfaction.
Lovelace and Rosen (1996) studied the relationship between cultural variables and person–environment ﬁt, hypothesizing that racial/ethnic minority
group members may feel less of a ﬁt to their environments than do White
managers. They found that African American managers reported lower
satisfaction with ﬁt than White or Hispanic managers. However, the effect
size was very small (0.03). Lyons and O’Brien (2006) studied racial climate
as a moderator of TWA outcome variables (satisfaction) for African American employees. They found that need-reinforcer correspondence was highly
related (r = 0.66) to satisfaction and that racial climate did not moderate the
relationship between satisfaction and intentions to leave the organization.
They also found, in qualitative analyses, that participants described TWA
reinforcers to explain factors that contributed to their satisfaction, suggesting
that TWA work values were relevant for their participants. Their conclusion
was that ‘‘the TWA has relevance for African American employees’’ (p. 395).
Eggerth and Flynn (in press) also found TWA work values in their study
with Latina immigrants. They conducted 10 interviews in two locations in
the United States with Latinas who held low-wage jobs. They found that
most of the reinforcers were described in the women’s narratives about their
favorite and least liked jobs, with TWA’s compensation and security values
noted by each participant.
In sum, the limited research on the role of race/ethnicity in TWA has been
shown to support Dawis’s (1994) contention that race and ethnicity inﬂuence
the perception of person–environment ﬁt, which inﬂuences TWA outcome
variables, such as job satisfaction. The two studies that speciﬁcally analyzed
TWA constructs have found that the reinforcers proposed by the theory
may be used to describe the work values and needs of Latina and African
American participants and that need-reinforcer correspondence explained a
substantial amount of variance in African American workers’ satisfaction.

222

Career Development and Counseling

Clearly, more research is needed to extend these ﬁndings to other groups.
We also recommend that researchers focus on reinforcers that may be unique
to racial/ethnic minority populations, such as working with other minority
individuals, or on perceptions of racial ﬁt that may not be applicable to
White participants.
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and Compromise
Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and compromise emerged in the
1980s as a theoretical framework to understand the developmental processes
that youth undergo in beginning to understand the world of work (Gottfredson, 1981, 2005). Similar to Holland’s theory, the theory of circumscription
and compromise views vocational choice as a matching process; individuals
choose careers that correspond with their interests, goals, skills, and abilities.
What makes Gottfredson’s theory unique, however, is the close attention it
pays to how children and adolescents learn about various occupations and
about their identity and sense of self and to how they use this information to
determine which occupations ﬁt them (see Gottfredson, 2005).
The circumscription and compromise theory hypothesizes four critical developmental stages that inﬂuence the career development process:
(1) growth in cognitive abilities, (2) development of self, (3) elimination of
least favorite vocational options (circumscription), and (4) development of an
understanding of external constraints on vocational choices (compromise).
Gottfredson also presents a series of stages in which children, as early as
3 to 5 years of age, begin the career development process. The various stages
focus on how children develop their orientation to size, power, and gender
(stage 1); understand gender differences in the world of work (stage 2); gain
a beginning understanding of social values and varying abilities needed for
speciﬁc types of jobs (stage 3); and develop an understanding of internal
factors (e.g., career interests, needs, values) that may determine their ﬁnal
occupational choice (stage 4).
The focus on development within context, power differentials in the occupational landscape, and social values and prestige associated with various
types of work in Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and compromise
makes it attractive for understanding the career development of racial/ethnic
minorities. However, very little research has empirically examined the applicability of this theory with diverse groups. This may be due to the difﬁculty
in researching career constructs with children at such an early stage; the
complexity associated with examining constructs as multifaceted as power,
prestige, and social values; or the lack of measurement tools speciﬁcally
developed within this framework. Regardless, research is needed to fully
understand how this theory can be applicable to a broad range of people.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

223

In sum, despite its promise, the dearth of research on the role of race/
ethnicity in Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and compromise limits
the conclusions that can be drawn about the theory’s applicability with
persons from diverse racial/ethnic groups. The theory’s attention to how
people limit the career options they consider has the potential to be very
useful for understanding the career development of people of color, particularly in that the occupational landscape of the United States does not
make opportunities and access to various types of work equally available to
individuals from minority backgrounds. More research is clearly needed to
understand the process of circumscription and compromise for individuals
from diverse backgrounds.
The Theories of Career Development and Career Construction
Super’s developmental theory is one of the most inﬂuential in vocational
psychology. As Betz (2008) notes, it revolutionized the ﬁeld when ﬁrst
introduced in 1953. The theory is summarized by Hartung (Chapter 4,
this volume). Savickas’s career construction theory (see Chapter 6, this
volume) can be seen as an update to Super’s theory, one that views career
development from a constructionist perspective. The latter emphasizes the
view ‘‘that individuals actively create their own subjective and personal
career realities’’ (Hartung & Taber, 2008).
Super (Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996) included racial and ethnic background as part of the cultural milieu in which children begin to develop
a sense of self-concept that becomes implemented in occupational choices.
Super’s early work was extensively researched primarily on White, uppermiddle-class men, although by the 1980s, researchers examined the applicability of the theory to women and people of color. Early studies examined
racial group differences in Super’s constructs, such as career maturity (e.g.,
Westbrook, Buck, Wynne, & Sanford, 1994). More recent research has examined factors related to career adaptability and exploration (e.g., Kenny &
Bledsoe, 2005). The latter study deﬁned adaptability as career planning,
career outcome expectations, school identiﬁcation, and perceptions of barriers and found that parents and teachers were signiﬁcant sources of support
for urban youth. Speciﬁcally, family support was related to perceptions of
barriers and career outcome expectations, and teacher support was related
to identifying with school.
Savickas (2011) further deﬁnes the self as shaped by culture, noting that
‘‘identities are co-constructed by a psychological self and a social context’’
(p. 18). By deﬁnition, the social context is shaped by the individual’s cultural
group memberships. As the individual grows and develops and expresses
his or her identity through narratives, there are many inﬂuences on the

224

Career Development and Counseling

narrative that will be shaped by cultural messages. Savickas notes that this
perspective is inﬂuenced by Western cultural values, which assume that
the career narrative is composed individually. However, he also notes that
individuals are always inﬂuenced by others. As he states, ‘‘Identity is seldom
an individual project’’ (p. 18), and many others contribute to the construction
of identity. Thus, in collectivist societies, individuals’ narratives may be
highly inﬂuenced by the expectations of others because of the importance
placed on valuing others’ views.
Blustein and colleagues (2010) examined the role of race and ethnicity in
a qualitative study based on career construction theory. They found that
half of 32 students in their study had incorporated the perception of barriers
due to racism into their construction of their careers and future, and half
were unaware of the effect of their race or ethnicity. Of those who had
incorporated a perspective on racism into their overall career narrative,
half had developed mechanisms to counter or be resistant to that racism, and
half were more pessimistic about their futures because of racism. The authors
concluded with a suggestion that career intervention programs incorporate
tools to foster resistance to racism.
In sum, much more research is needed to understand how racial and
ethnic group background inﬂuences career development across the life span,
including the ways in which individuals construct their careers. Future
research needs to investigate how career adaptability is shaped by different
cultural values and different barriers due to racism and its effects. Blustein
and colleagues’ (2010) research is a promising beginning, but more research
needs to be done to see if career narratives are different in systematic ways
across racial/ethnic groups.
Social Cognitive Career Theory
Social cognitive career theory (SCCT) was developed to understand and
explain the vocational development of individuals from a broad range
of backgrounds (Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994, 2000). Brieﬂy stated, the
social cognitive career framework asserts that both person inputs (e.g.,
gender, race/ethnicity, ability status) and background contextual affordances create the learning experiences to which an individual is exposed;
these learning experiences inﬂuence self-efﬁcacy expectations and outcome
expectations, which, in turn, inﬂuence interests, goals, and actions. SCCT
integrates both individual variables (e.g., interests, values, abilities) and
cultural and contextual variables (e.g., environmental factors) to fully understand the career development process (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
SCCT operates from an understanding that the environment ‘‘plays an
undeniable, potent role in helping to determine who gets to do what and

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

225

where, for how long, and with what sorts of rewards’’ (Lent & Sheu,
2009, p. 692).
Due to its emphasis on contextual and sociocultural inﬂuences on the
career development processes, research utilizing SCCT has greatly enhanced
our knowledge of how individuals from minority racial/ethnic backgrounds
make career decisions. For example, numerous studies have examined how
the social cognitive career model is represented within Latino and Mexican
American student populations (e.g., Flores, Navarro, & DeWitz, 2008; Flores
& O’Brien, 2002), African American student populations (e.g., Gainor &
Lent, 1998), and Asian American student populations (e.g., Tang et al., 1999).
Additionally, a plethora of research (e.g., Fouad & Smith, 1996; Gainor &
Lent, 1998; Lent et al., 2005; Lent, Lopez, Lopez, & Sheu, 2008) has examined
the predictive nature of social cognitive career variables (e.g., self-efﬁcacy,
outcome expectations) on math- and science-related interests and goals.
Much of this research has examined either tests of SCCT’s larger models
(e.g., interest, choice) or the predictive nature of speciﬁc contextual and
individual input variables on social cognitive career constructs (e.g., how
cultural factors affect career decision-making self-efﬁcacy).
Research has found that self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations predicted
math and science interests and goals in Hispanic and African American
high school students (Fouad & Smith, 1996), African American college
students (Byars-Winston, 2006; Lent et al., 2005, 2008; Waller, 2006), and
Asian American students (Kelly, Gunsalus, & Gunsalus, 2009). For example,
in two separate investigations, Lent and his colleagues (Lent et al., 2005,
2008) compared the social cognitive choice model in African American and
European American students majoring in engineering. They found that
the model accounted for academic interests and choices in both groups
of students. Byars-Winston, Estrada, Howard, Davis, and Zalapa (2010)
also found support for the social cognitive model in predicting interests
and goal commitment among biological science and engineering majors in a
diverse samples of African American, Latino(a), Asian American, and Native
American college students.
In sum, because of its emphasis on contextual inﬂuences in the career
development process, SCCT lends itself well to understanding the role
of cultural inﬂuences on the career development process for racial/ethnic
minorities. In fact, it appears that much of the recent research examining
the role of cultural inﬂuences on career development has utilized a social
cognitive framework; as a whole, this research has provided cross-cultural
support for the social cognitive career model with various racial/ethnic
groups. However, there continues to be a need for additional research that
examines how social cognitive career variables operate with other cultural
variables, such as ethnic identity, acculturation, and cultural values.

226

Career Development and Counseling

CULTURAL FACTORS RELATED TO CAREER DEVELOPMENT
In the previous section, we brieﬂy reviewed multicultural considerations and
applications of the major vocational theories. However, a number of cultural
factors deserve attention in their own right, based on the assumption that
they have the potential to inﬂuence the career behavior of diverse persons.
Some of these factors have been studied in relation to particular career
theories; others are not currently aligned well with the major theories. This
section discusses how these factors—in particular, acculturation, cultural
values, role models, perceptions of discrimination, barriers and supports,
ethnic identity, and differences between aspirations and expectations—may
shape the vocational development of racial/ethnic minority persons.
Cultural Values
Cultural values can have a meaningful impact on the career choices of
racial/ethnic minorities. Take, for example, a Latina college student who
comes from a cultural background that emphasizes the values of familismo
and colectivismo; this student may make career decisions that meet cultural
or family expectations or that allow her to give back to her community,
regardless of her interests, self-efﬁcacy, or outcome expectations. Despite
the potentially powerful inﬂuence cultural values can have on the career
development process, little research to date has fully explicated the relationship between cultural values and career decision making. Only a handful
of studies have examined the inﬂuence of cultural values on the career
development process of racial/ethnic minority populations. As mentioned
previously, Tsabsari and colleagues (2005) investigated whether culture
moderated the relationship between congruence and job satisfaction and
reported that interest congruence was more predictive of job satisfaction in
societies that possessed an individualistic value orientation. Although Gupta
and Tracey (2005) did not ﬁnd that the cultural value of dharma predicted
congruence, Kantamneni and Fouad (in press) found that the cultural values
of individualism and collectivism predicted Social interests in South Asian
American college students.
Two studies also examined the inﬂuence of cultural values on the process
of career counseling. Kim and Atkinson (2002) found that Asian American clients who expressed a strong adherence to Asian cultural values rated
Asian American career counselors higher on dimensions of effectiveness than
clients with low adherence to Asian cultural values. Clients with low adherence to Asian cultural values rated European American counselors higher on
empathic understanding than their Asian American counterparts. Kim, Li,
and Liang (2002) investigated the effect of career counseling orientation and
cultural values on Asian Americans’ perceptions of counselors’ effectiveness.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

227

Results indicated that clients with high adherence to Asian cultural values
perceived higher empathic understanding and a stronger working alliance
with their counselor than did clients with low adherence to Asian cultural
values, regardless of the counselor’s racial/ethnic background.
A series of qualitative investigations have examined the vocational development of African American (Pearson & Bieschke, 2001), Latina (Gomez et al.,
2001), Native American (Juntunen et al., 2001), and Asian American (Fouad
et al., 2008) adults. These studies highlighted the inﬂuential role that cultural
values can have on the vocational development of racial/ethnic minorities. Gomez and colleagues found that cultural variables such as cultural
values, gender role messages, and familial career aspirations inﬂuenced participants’ vocational development. Speciﬁcally, participants indicated that
cultural values of familism and collectivism inﬂuenced how they made
career decisions; participants’ families were typically oriented toward a collective identity, and participants indicated that they had a responsibility
toward the well-being of their family and community. Similarly, Juntunen
and colleagues demonstrated that collectivism was strongly related to career
development among Native Americans; career success was viewed as a
collective experience, and success was often measured by an ability to contribute to the well-being of others within their community. Pearson and
Bieschke (2001) investigated the role of cultural factors on persistence in
maintaining successful careers for African American women and found that
family values had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on their vocational development;
participants received messages about work values from their families, such
as messages related to work ethic and altruism.
Finally, Fouad and colleagues (2008) found that cultural values emerged
as a typical category in their qualitative analysis of Asian American career
development; cultural values were found to inﬂuence participants’ communication styles at work, their ideas of career and vocational success, their
sense of family obligations, and how career exploration was facilitated. Interestingly, Fouad and her colleagues noted that cultural values were primarily
transmitted through the families of their participants, and it was often difﬁcult for the participants to delineate between cultural and familial values. As
a whole, both qualitative and quantitative investigations highlight the inﬂuential role of cultural inﬂuences in constructing meaning through work for
individuals from racial/ethnic minority backgrounds. Cultural values inﬂuence perceptions of the role of work, vocational interests, and how the career
counseling process is perceived by individuals from minority backgrounds.
Although this research is limited, research has suggested that cultural values may be an essential component of the career development process for
racial/ethnic minority group members; further research is needed to fully
understand this relationship.

228

Career Development and Counseling

Acculturation
Acculturation has long been hypothesized to play an important role in the
career development process of ethnic minorities (Leong & Chou, 1994) and
is often linked to educational and career aspirations, vocational interests,
career self-efﬁcacy, job satisfaction, and career maturity. Much of the current
research has focused on Latino(a)s and Asian Americans. A small number of
studies have investigated the relationship between acculturation and educational and career aspirations. In an investigation of the role of acculturation
on aspirations, McWhirter, Hackett, and Bandalos (1998) proposed a structural model to predict the educational and career expectations of Mexican
American high school girls and found support for acculturation as a predictor of educational aspirations. Similarly, Flores and O’Brien (2002) found
that acculturation was signiﬁcantly correlated with career choice traditionality, career choice prestige, and career aspirations for Mexican American
students; women who were more assimilated to mainstream culture chose
more gender-traditional and less prestigious occupations than women who
were less assimilated to mainstream culture. Rivera, Chen, Flores, Blumberg,
and Ponterotto (2007) found that Anglo acculturation signiﬁcantly predicted
self-efﬁcacy regarding female-dominated career options in Hispanic women.
Flores and colleagues (2008), however, found contradictory results in a
study of Mexican American high school students. Anglo-oriented acculturation was positively related to educational goal expectations and aspirations
in Mexican American high school students; students who were acculturated to mainstream society expressed higher educational aspirations and
expectations. Similarly, Flores, Ojeda, Huang, Gee, and Lee (2006) found
that Anglo-oriented acculturation emerged as a signiﬁcant predictor of high
educational goals. Mexican American students who indicated high levels of
Anglo-oriented acculturation were more likely to have higher educational
goals than students who were less acculturated to Anglo culture. Navarro,
Flores, and Worthington (2007) found that generation status, Anglo orientation, and Mexican orientation did not signiﬁcantly predict math and science
performance accomplishments; neither did these accomplishments predict
math and science outcome expectations or math and science goals. Further
investigation is needed to explain these contradictory ﬁndings.
Vocational research has also examined the relationship between acculturation and vocational outcomes in Asian Americans. Leong (2001) examined
the relationship between acculturation and job satisfaction, occupational
stress, and supervisors’ performance ratings. He found that acculturation to mainstream culture (Anglo orientation) was found to be positively
related to job satisfaction and to supervisors’ performance ratings; acculturation was negatively related to occupational stress and strain. Hardin,

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

229

Leong, and Osipow (2001) compared the relationships between career maturity, self-construals, and acculturation for Asian Americans and European
Americans. Results indicated that low and medium acculturated (medium
to high Asian identiﬁcation) Asian Americans had signiﬁcantly higher interdependence and lower career maturity scores than European Americans;
however, highly acculturated (high Western identiﬁcation) Asian Americans
did not signiﬁcantly differ from European Americans. Tang and colleagues
(1999) investigated the relationship between acculturation and social cognitive variables and reported a signiﬁcant negative relationship of acculturation
to career self-efﬁcacy, vocational interests, and career choice. Self-efﬁcacy
was strongly inﬂuenced by acculturation, which in turn inﬂuenced interests
and career choice. Individuals who were more Asian acculturated displayed
interests in and chose careers that were more typical and representative of
Asian Americans (i.e., science or engineering occupations). Asian Americans
who were higher in acculturation (Anglo acculturated) displayed interests
and choices in career ﬁelds that were less typical and representative for
Asian Americans.
On the whole, these studies suggest that acculturation is intimately related
to vocational development; many of the studies highlight the important role
that acculturation plays in career and educational aspirations, career maturity, and job satisfaction. Yet research in this area is still minimal, and further
research is needed to investigate the relationship between acculturation and
vocational outcomes. For example, how is acculturation related to the development of vocational interests, perceptions of vocational opportunities, and
perceptions of discrimination? Further, the research examining the relationship between acculturation and career development has primarily focused
on Asian American and Latino populations, with little research examining
other groups (e.g., individuals of African or Middle Eastern descent) in the
United States.
Ethnic Identity
Only a few studies to date have fully examined how racial/ethnic identity
and attitudes affect the career development process. Gainor and Lent (1998)
investigated the relationship between racial identity attitudes and social
cognitive career variables (math self-efﬁcacy, math outcome expectations,
math and science interests) for African American college students and found
that social cognitive career variables predicted interests across varying
levels of racial identity attitudes. Racial identity attitudes were minimally
related to social cognitive variables and did not affect the relationship
of social cognitive variables to interests and choices in math and science
options. These results suggest that the social cognitive career model may

230

Career Development and Counseling

be applicable across different racial identity statuses with African American
college students. Similarly, Gushue and Whitson (2006) examined how ethnic
identity and parent and teacher support were related to career decision
self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations in African American ninth-grade
students; they found that ethnic identity was not related to career decision
self-efﬁcacy or outcome expectations. Speciﬁc to math and science, Kelly,
Gunsalus, and Gunsalus (2009) investigated how ethnic identity, self-efﬁcacy,
outcome expectations, and career interests predict science and nonscience
goal intentions among Korean American college students and found that
ethnic identity did not predict goal intentions.
Two studies have found some relationships between ethnic identity and
career variables. Byars-Winston and colleagues (2010) found that ethnic identity, other-group orientation, and perceived campus climate were predictive
of academic self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations in a group of African
American, Latino, Southeast Asian, and Native American undergraduates
majoring in biological science and engineering; other-group orientation was
found to signiﬁcantly predict self-efﬁcacy. Similarly, Byars-Winston (2006)
examined how racial ideology (i.e., nationalist, humanist, assimilationist,
and oppressed minority) is related to career self-efﬁcacy, career outcome
expectations, career interests, and perceived career barriers in African American college students. She found that two racial ideologies (nationalist and
assimilationist) were predictive of career self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations,
interests, and barriers. A racial ideology that emphasized the uniqueness
of being of African descent (nationalist) and an ideology that emphasized
commonalities between African Americans and other Americans (assimilationist) were related to career self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, interests,
and barriers.
In sum, these studies provide a preliminary understanding of how ethnic
identity is related to vocational development. Keep in mind that a majority
of the studies that have examined the relationship of ethnic identity to career
variables have been conducted using a social cognitive career framework
and have provided support for the use of this model with individuals of
varying levels of racial/ethnic identity development or racial ideologies.
However, more research is needed to fully understand the relationship
between ethnic identity and various career constructs, using both the SCCT
framework as well as other career theories that are inﬂuential in career
development.
Role Models
Role models can act as mentors, provide vocational information, and both
directly and indirectly inﬂuence career decisions, often playing a critical

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

231

role in career development (Gibson, 2004). Yet, little empirical research has
examined how role models speciﬁcally inﬂuence the career development
process for racial/ethnic minorities. Karunanayake and Nauta (2004) examined differences in role models between Whites and racial/ethnic minorities;
they found no differences in the overall number of role models identiﬁed
by either White or minority students or in the inﬂuences of role models
on students’ career development, although they did ﬁnd that participants
identiﬁed role models who were of the same race as their own.
Qualitative investigations have also found that role models are inﬂuential
in the vocational development of Latinas (Gomez et al., 2001) and Asian
Americans (Fouad et al., 2008). In an investigation by Gomez and her
colleagues, role models were identiﬁed as critical inﬂuences in the career
development of Latina women. Participants identiﬁed their mothers as role
models, although several of the participants stated that they lacked Latina
professional role models and thus sought role models across professions,
ethnicity, race, gender, and age. Fouad and her colleagues also found that role
models emerged as an inﬂuential contextual inﬂuence for Asian Americans’
career development. Participants identiﬁed models that contributed to their
community and reported receiving emotional support from their models.
Additionally, family members were most commonly identiﬁed as role models
for the participants.
Perceptions of Discrimination
Experiences of discrimination can have a lasting impact on the career
decisions that individuals from racial/ethnic minority backgrounds make,
which may be evidenced in the occupational segregation found in the U.S.
labor force. Occupational segregation and differential rates of unemployment
between racial/ethnic groups may be due to, in part, restrictions of career and
work choices based on bias and prejudice in the hiring process; individuals
from racial/ethnic minority backgrounds may experience discrimination
that restricts their opportunities for employment. Anticipated discrimination
may further restrict vocational choices; for example, individuals may not
choose to enter certain types of careers based on fears that they will be
discriminated against because of their race/ethnicity or other individual
difference factors (e.g., gender, sexual orientation).
Minimal research has been conducted to investigate the role of discrimination empirically. An important investigation by Chung and Harmon (1999)
found that ethnic minorities perceived more discrimination in the workplace
than did their White counterparts. In a study on urban students’ constructions about school, work, race, and ethnicity, Blustein and colleagues (2010)
demonstrated that half of their participants had incorporated perceptions

232

Career Development and Counseling

of racism into their career construction. Conversely, a study by Evans and
Herr (1994) found that perceptions of discrimination were not related to
career aspirations in African American college students. These three studies provide a preliminary yet contradictory understanding of the role of
discrimination in career development.
Perceived Barriers and Supports
Perceived barriers (in addition to discrimination) and supports have been
identiﬁed as important factors in understanding how individuals from
diverse backgrounds construct their vocational identity (Lent et al., 1994,
2000; Swanson & Woitke, 1997). Gender and ethnic differences in career and
educational barriers have been well documented in the vocational psychology literature (e.g., Luzzo & Hutcheson, 1996; McWhirter, 1997). For example,
in two separate studies, McWhirter (1997) and Luzzo and McWhirter (2001)
found that ethnic minority college students perceived more educational and
career barriers than European American students; ethnic minority college
students also perceived themselves to have lower efﬁcacy to cope with their
perceived barriers.
Similarly, McWhirter, Torres, Salgado, and Valdez (2007) investigated
internal and external educational barriers among Mexican American and
White high school students and found ethnic differences in the perception
of barriers; Mexican American students expected to encounter more barriers
to attaining postsecondary education and experience more difﬁculty in
overcoming their perceived barriers than their White counterparts. Ojeda and
Flores (2008) found that perceived educational barriers predicted educational
aspirations beyond the inﬂuence of gender, generation level, and parents’
education in Mexican American high school students. Likewise, Rivera
and colleagues (2007) found that perceived barriers were related to the
consideration of female-dominated jobs among Hispanic women. Other
studies with speciﬁc adult populations (e.g., battered women) have found
that racial/ethnic minorities may not perceive greater barriers than European
Americans (Chronister & McWhirter, 2004).
Research has also investigated supports that can help racial/ethnic minorities overcome institutional obstacles. Constantine, Wallace, and Kindaichi
(2005) examined the career decision status of African American adolescents
and found that perceived parental support was positively related to career
certainty. In a study of inner-city students, mostly of racial/ethnic minority
backgrounds, Kenny and her colleagues (2003) found that perceived general support and kinship support was related to school engagement, career
aspirations, expectations for future career success, and importance of future
work. Similarly, a qualitative investigation by Kenny, Gualdron, Sparks,

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

233

Blustein, and Jernigan (2007) examined perceptions of supports and barriers to educational and career attainment among high school students from
diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds. Students reported having a number of
supports, such as family members, school and/or teachers, and friends. These
studies, coupled with the qualitative investigations of racial/ethnic minority
women described earlier (e.g., Gomez et al., 2001; Pearson & Bieschke, 2001),
provide evidence that supports can be a very positive inﬂuence for persons
of color. As a whole, studies examining barriers and supports suggest that
high school and college students of color may perceive greater educational
and career barriers than their White counterparts. However, supports, particularly relational supports, have been found to have a protective inﬂuence
for students.
Occupational Aspirations and Expectations
It is important to understand the career aspirations and expectations of
individuals from minority racial/ethnic backgrounds. Career aspirations
represent vocational preferences or career possibilities if ideal conditions are
present, whereas career expectations can be thought of as career pursuits
that are realistic and accessible (Metz, Fouad, & Ihle-Helledy, 2009).
Fouad and Byars-Winston (2005) conducted a meta-analysis of 16 studies and found no signiﬁcant differences in career aspirations based on
racial/ethnic identity. However, race and ethnicity were related to perceptions of barriers and opportunities; ethnic minorities perceived fewer
opportunities and greater barriers than White Americans. These ﬁndings
suggest that career aspirations may not be related to ethnic background, but
the perception of barriers and opportunities to achieve those aspirations is
related to ethnic background. Metz and colleagues (2009) examined discrepancies between occupational aspirations and expectations in over 600 diverse
college students and found ethnic differences in the students’ aspirations but
not in their expectations. The career aspirations and expectations of minority students were more congruent than those of White students; however,
career barriers, self-efﬁcacy, and differential status predicted discrepancies
between aspirations and expectations for ethnic minority students, but not
for White students. Howard and her colleagues (2011) examined the relationship between gender, socioeconomic status (SES), race/ethnicity, and career
aspirations in more than 22,000 8th- and 10th-grade students. They found
that Native American students reported lower aspirations than students
from other racial-ethnic groups, yet these differences were moderated by
gender and social class. Native American male students reported aspirations
lower than all other males, and Native American and Asian/Paciﬁc Islander
students from low-SES backgrounds had lower aspirations than students

234

Career Development and Counseling

who were not from low-SES backgrounds. As a whole, these studies suggest
that race and ethnicity do indeed affect career aspiration and expectations.
Summary
In sum, empirical investigations (both quantitative and qualitative) have
found that cultural inﬂuences are indeed related to the vocational development of racial/ethnic minorities. Yet, much of this research is preliminary
in nature, and we are just beginning the process of fully understanding
how culture affects career development and the meaning that racial/ethnic
minorities construct out of their work. In general, vocational researchers
have not fully examined cultural factors with speciﬁc racial/ethnic populations or subpopulations; neither have they examined the complex ways in
which these factors interface with one another. As a result, the ﬁeld has a
very limited understanding of how the career development process may be
affected by one’s cultural background. Further, much of the research in this
section has been conducted with college student samples. Simply attending
college is a privilege that many individuals do not have; thus, the ﬁndings
of these studies may not be generalizable beyond a relatively privileged
portion of the racial/ethnic minority population in the United States.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
So how should career counselors incorporate this information into their
practice? How can career counselors be culturally competent when working with racial/ethnic minority clients? We have several suggestions and
recommendations for career counselors to consider, including developing
foundational knowledge of the cultural values and history of different
racial/ethnic groups in the United States. In this section, we brieﬂy review
models of career counseling that explicitly incorporate a consideration of
culture, offer our recommendations regarding counselors’ metacognitions
when they work with any client who is culturally different from themselves,
and, ﬁnally, consider counseling implications related to the speciﬁc cultural
factors discussed earlier.
Career Counseling Models Incorporating Culture
Several models have been developed within the past two decades to help
counselors integrate and infuse culture into career counseling. They complement each other, each providing some helpful detail on part of the process.
Leung’s model (1995) concentrates on career interventions. He argues that
all career interventions (at the systemic, group, or individual level) need

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

235

to include a focus on educational outcomes, as well as on occupational
outcomes, to help buttress clients against oppression and discrimination.
Fouad and Bingham’s (1995) culturally appropriate career counseling model
emphasizes the effect of racial/ethnic identity on the identiﬁcation of career
issues and the inﬂuences of the dominant culture on career processes and
decisions.
The most recent model is the cultural formation approach (CFA; Leong,
Hardin, & Gupta, 2011). Building on Leong and Hartung’s (1997) integrativesequential conceptual framework for career counseling, CFA identiﬁes ﬁve
dimensions: (1) cultural identity, (2) cultural conception of career problems,
(3) self in cultural context, (4) cultural dynamics in the therapeutic relationship, and (5) overall cultural assessment. The application of the CFA to
various racial/ethnic groups was articulated in a series of articles in a June
2010 special issue of the Journal of Career Development.
Taking various elements from these models, career counselors are encouraged to consider how culture inﬂuences the development of the self, how
culture shapes the view of career concerns as a problem, and how culture
helps to shape the goals that clients have for counseling. The dominant U.S.
culture fosters the sense of self as an independent individual who makes
autonomous decisions about his or her life. Other cultures foster the sense
of self as someone who is interdependent with others (such as family or clan
members), with individuals being expected to achieve group goals, such as
pursuing a particular occupational goal to bring honor to the family. Clearly,
a client’s sense of self as pursuing individual goals versus the goals of his
or her family will inﬂuence the career counseling process and the career
counseling relationship.
Counselors need to understand their own cultural sense of self to ensure
that they do not impose their values on their clients. But counselors also need
to be prepared to help clients understand when their own sense of self is in
ﬂux. As the studies on acculturation point out, many clients navigate two
worlds, those of their parents’ culture as well as the U.S. dominant culture,
with potentially conﬂicting messages about what is the appropriate path to
take as an independent adult. Sometimes clients are confused about which
set of expectations to follow, their parents’ expectations to adhere to group
goals or the larger society’s expectations to develop independence. Career
choices are part of those expectations, and career counselors can often play
an important role in helping clients discover solutions to this dilemma.
Counselor Cognitions
Arguing that culturally competent career counseling needs to be an active
process that involves career counselors’ constant development of insight and

236

Career Development and Counseling

monitoring, Byars-Winston and Fouad (2006) proposed a set of metacognitive
skills for career counseling. They focused on three processes: developing a
plan of action, implementing the plan and self-monitoring, and evaluating
the plan. In developing the plan, career counselors need to consider their own
cultural identity, their knowledge of the client’s racial/ethnic background
and identity (or identities), and identify what they do not know about the
client’s background. Their plan needs to be ﬂexible enough to be readjusted
as they learn more about the client. Counselors consider their goals for the
client and reﬂect on the cultural values related to those goals. For example,
is the goal focused on achievement, and does this match the client’s values?
As they plan strategies and interventions, career counselors consider how
the strategies were chosen and which strategies might be more appropriate
for the client’s concerns.
The second process is implementing the plan and developing mechanisms
to self-monitor. This process involves actively monitoring what information
they are paying attention to and how that may be related to their own (i.e.,
the counselor’s) cultural values. Self-monitoring also includes understanding
when some issues or concerns are not addressed because of the counselors’
discomfort. Finally, self-monitoring includes being open to information that
is not consistent with the cultural assumptions made about the client and
that may, therefore, call for modiﬁcation to the counseling plan.
The ﬁnal process is evaluating, that is, bringing into conscious thought the
question of how effective the counselor has been with interventions. Asking
‘‘how effective have I been?’’ is part of this process, but career counselors
are also encouraged to consider what data they will use to assess this. Were
the client’s goals for counseling met? Did these change over time, and, if
so, how might that be related to cultural values and the cultural ﬁt of the
interventions? How did the career counselor feel at various stages of career
counseling?
Practical Implications of Research on the Cultural Factors
As we noted, several cultural factors have been studied in relation to
racial/ethnic minority group individuals. It is critical for career counselors
to understand the complex and dynamic ways that cultural variables related
to race and ethnicity affect many aspects of career decision making. We have
several speciﬁc recommendations based on our review of the research:
• Explicitly attend to racism and oppression and the role that they may

have played in suppressing options or creating barriers. It is important
that counselors create a safe environment to ask about experiences with
and perceptions about discrimination.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

237

• Help clients develop strategies to augment resistance to racism.
• Ask clients about the expectations their family or signiﬁcant others

have for their career choices and who have been important positive or
negative role models.
• Cultural background may affect the perception that career or work
choices are (or are not) exclusively individual choices. In addition
to family expectations, there may be cultural assumptions about the
desirability (or lack thereof) of some choices. Ask clients whom they
will consult on their decision making.
• Culture shapes the perception that career concerns are a problem or that
career development is a process. For some individuals, the concept of a
career trajectory may be quite foreign. Ask clients how they envision the
process of making a decision or a series of decisions about their career
or future work.
• Culture will shape career adaptability, including how clients develop
resiliency and future orientation. Ask clients how they typically overcome obstacles or barriers. Assess a client’s support system and coping
skills. Assess whether the client is oriented to future planning or is more
focused on the present.
• Cultural values are more inﬂuential for some clients than are traditional career planning variables such as interests. Ask clients about the
strongest inﬂuences in their decisions or choices.
• Ask about both potential barriers and supports, focusing on the client’s
strengths to facilitate the development of supports and to counter the
barriers.
• Determine if the client identiﬁes differences between his or her aspirations (or ideal occupations) and realistic occupational goals. If so, help
them to clarify, understand, and address this gap.
SUMMARY
It is critical to understand that all clients belong to one or more cultural
groups, that they may adopt (or discount) the cultural values of their
groups, and that the cultural values of their different group identities may
sometimes conﬂict. This is true for individuals who identify as European
American as well as for members of racial/ethnic minority groups. We argue
that culturally competent career counseling is good for all clients because it
brings their culture into the center of counseling. However, it also true that
career counselors need to understand how racial/ethnic background may
inﬂuence their clients.
We have discussed research that has investigated various aspects of the
major career theories. We agree with Young and colleagues (2007) that,

238

Career Development and Counseling

ideally, career theories are best developed emically, from within the cultural
framework of racial/ethnic groups. Only then will we fully understand the
cultural values that may be inﬂuencing work-related decisions. However,
the research on how racial/ethnic groups differ on constructs in the major
career theories has shown, for the most part, that culturally competent career
counseling may be informed by any of the theories, as long as career counselors explicitly use metacognitive skills to culturally adapt the theory. It is
clear that cultural values, barriers and supports, acculturation, and perceptions of discrimination must be incorporated, no matter which theoretical
perspective a counselor uses. Our overall conclusion is that, at this point,
rigorous research is still needed to more fully explain how career choices
and adjustment are inﬂuenced by racial/ethnic background.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. T. (1931). Epic of America. Safety Harbor, FL: Simon.
Armstrong, P. I., Hubert, L., & Rounds, J. (2003). Circular unidimensional scaling: A
new look at group differences in interest structure. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
50, 297–308.
Betz, N. E. (2008). Advances in vocational theories. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 357–374). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Blustein, D. L., Murphy, K. A., Kenny, M. E., Jernigan, M., Pérez-Gualdrón, L.,
Castañeda, T. . . . Davis, O. (2010). Exploring urban students’ constructions about
school, work, race, and ethnicity. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57(2), 248–254.
doi:10.1037/a0018939
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). Labor force statistics from the Current Population
Survey. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#race
Byars-Winston, A. M. (2006). Racial ideology in predicting social cognitive career
variables for Black undergraduates. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69, 134–148.
Byars-Winston, A., Estrada, Y., Howard, C., Davis, D. & Zalapa, J. (2010). Inﬂuence of
social cognitive and ethnic variables on academic goals of underrepresented students in science and engineering: A multiple-groups analysis. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 57, 205–218.
Byars-Winston, A. M., & Fouad, N. A. (2006). Metacognition and multicultural
competence: Expanding the culturally appropriate career counseling model. Career
Development Quarterly, 54, 187–201
Census Bureau. (2011). Census 2010. Retrieved from http://2010.census.gov/2010
census/data/index.php
Chronister, K. M., & McWhirter, E. H. (2004). Ethnic differences in career supports
and barriers for battered women: A pilot study. Journal of Career Assessment, 12,
169–187.
Chung, Y. B., & Harmon, L. W. (1999). Assessment of perceived occupational
opportunity for Black Americans. Journal of Career Assessment, 7, 45–62.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

239

Constantine, M. G., Wallace, B. C., & Kindaichi, M. M. (2005). Examining contextual
factors in the career decision path of African American adolescents. Journal of
Career Assessment, 13, 307–319.
Dawis, R. (1994). The theory of work adjustment as convergent theory. In M. L.
Savickas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in career development theories: Implications
for science and practice (pp. 33–43). Palo Alto, CA: CPP.
Dawis, R. V. (2005). The Minnesota theory of work adjustment. In S. D. Brown & R.
W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work
(pp. 3–23). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Day, S. X., & Rounds, J. (1998). Universality of vocational interest structure among
racial and ethnic minorities. American Psychologist, 53, 728–736.
Economic Policy Institute. (2010). Depression-like unemployment levels for Hispanics and African-Americans. Retrieved from http://www.epi.org/press/unemp
loyment_rate_for_hispanics_and_african_americans_approaches_depre/
Eggerth, D. E., & Flynn, M. A. (in press). Applying the theory of work adjustment to
Latino immigrant workers: An exploratory study. Journal of Career Development.
Evans, K. M., & Herr, E. L. (1994). The inﬂuence of racial identity and the perception
of discrimination on the career aspirations of African American men and women.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 44, 173–184.
Flores, L. Y. (2009). Empowering life choices: Career counseling in the contexts of
race and social class. In N. C. Gysbers, M. J. Heppner, & J. A Johnston (Eds.), Career
counseling: Contexts, processes, and techniques (3rd ed., pp. 49–74). Alexandria, VA:
American Counseling Association.
Flores, L. Y., Navarro, R. L., & DeWitz, S. (2008). Mexican American high school
students’ postsecondary educational goals applying social cognitive career theory.
Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 489–501.
Flores, L. Y., & O’Brien, K. M. (2002). The career development of Mexican American
adolescent women: A test of social cognitive career theory. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 49, 14–27.
Flores, L. Y., Ojeda, L., Huang, Y., Gee, D., & Lee, S. (2006). The relation of
acculturation, problem-solving appraisal, and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy
to Mexican American high school students’ educational goals. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 53, 260–266.
Flores, L. Y., Spanierman, L. B., Amstrong, P. I., & Velez, A. D. (2006).
Validity of the Strong Interest Inventory and Skills Conﬁdence Inventory
with Mexican American high school students. Journal of Career Assessment, 14,
183–202.
Fouad, N. A., & Bingham, R. (1995). Career counseling with racial/ethnic minorities.
In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (2nd ed.,
pp. 331–366). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fouad, N. A., & Byars-Winston, A. M. (2005). Cultural context of career choice:
Meta-analysis of race/ethnicity differences. Career Development Quarterly, 53,
223–233.
Fouad, N. A., & Kantamneni, N. (2008). Contextual factors in vocational psychology:
Intersections of individual, group, and societal dimensions. In S. D. Brown &

240

Career Development and Counseling

R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 408–425). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley.
Fouad, N. A., Kantamneni, N., Smothers, M. K., Chen, Y. L., Fitzpatrick, M. E., &
Terry, S. (2008). Asian American career development: A qualitative analysis.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 72, 43–59
Fouad, N. A., & Smith, P. L. (1996). A test of social cognitive model for middle school
students: Math and science. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 338.
Gainor, K. A., & Lent, R. W. (1998). Social cognitive expectations and racial identity
attitudes in predicting the math choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45, 403.
Gibson, C., & Jung, K. (2002). Historical census statistics on population totals by race,
1790 to 1990, and by Hispanic origin, 1970 to 1990, for the United States, regions,
divisions, and states. Washington, DC: Census Bureau.
Gibson, D. E. (2004). Role models in career development: New directions for theory
and research. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65, 134–156.
Gomez, M. J., Fassinger, R. E., Prosser, J., Cooke, K., Mejia, B., & Luna, J. (2001).
Voces abriendo caminos (voices forging paths): A qualitative study of the career
development of notable Latinas. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48, 286–300.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1981). Circumscription and compromise: A developmental theory of occupational aspirations. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 28(6), 545–579.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.28.6.545
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development & counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gupta, S., & Tracey, T. J. G. (2005). Dharma and interest–occupation congruence in
Asian Indian college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 13, 320–336.
Gushue, G. V., & Whitson, M. L. (2006). The relationship of ethnic identity and
gender role attitudes to the development of career choice goals among black and
Latina girls. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 379–385.
Hardin, E. E. (2007). Cultural validity of Holland’s theory revisited. Paper presented
in E. E. Hardin (Chair), Cultural validity of career theories: A new perspective. Symposium conducted at the 115th annual convention of the American Psychological
Association, San Francisco, CA.
Hardin, E. E., Leong, F. T. L., & Osipow, S. H. (2001). Cultural relativity in the
conceptualization of career maturity. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 36–52.
Hartung, P. J., & Taber, B. J. (2008). Career construction and subjective well-being.
Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 75–85.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Howard, K. A. S., Carlstrom, A. H., Katz, A. D., Chew, A. Y., Ray, G. C., Lain, L., &
Caulum, D. (2011). Career aspirations of youth: Untangling race/ethnicity, SES,
and gender. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79, 98–109.
Juntunen, C. L., Barraclough, D. J., Broneck, C. L., Seibel, G. A., Winrow, S. A., &
Morin, P. M. (2001). American Indian perspectives on the career journey. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 48, 274–285.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

241

Kantamneni, N., & Fouad, N. A. (2011). Structural differences in the 2004 Strong
Interest Inventory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 78, 193–201.
Kantamneni, N., & Fouad, N. A. (in press). Contextual factors and vocational
interests of South Asian Americans. Journal of Career Assessment.
Karunanayake, D., & Nauta, M. M. (2004). The relationship between race and
students’ identiﬁed career role models and perceived role model inﬂuence. Career
Development Quarterly, 52, 225–234.
Kelly, K. R., Gunsalus, A. C., & Gunsalus, R. (2009). Social cognitive predictors of
the career goals of Korean American students. Career Development Quarterly, 58,
14–28
Kenny, M. E., & Bledsoe, M. (2005). Contributions of the relational context to
career adaptability among urban adolescents. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66(2),
257–272. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.10.002
Kenny, M. E., Blustein, D., Chaves, A., Grossman, J., & Gallagher, L. A. (2003).
The role of perceived barriers and relational support in the educational and
vocational lives of urban high school students. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 50,
142–155.
Kenny, M. E., Gualdron, D. S., Sparks, E., Blustein, D. L., & Jernigan, M. (2007).
Urban adolescents’ constructions of supports and barriers to educational and
career attainment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 336–343.
Kim, B. S. K., & Atkinson, D. R. (2002). Asian American client adherence to
Asian cultural values, counselor expression of cultural values, counselor
ethnicity, and career counseling process. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 49,
3–13.
Kim, B. S. K., Li, L. C., & Liang, T. H. (2002). Effects of Asian American client
adherence to Asian cultural values, session goal, and counselor emphasis of
client expression on career counseling process. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
49, 342–354.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 45(1), 79–122. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1994.1027
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers
to career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
36–49.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., Sheu, H. B., Schmidt, J., Brenner, B. R., Gloster, C. S.,
Treistman, D. (2005). Social cognitive predictors of academic interests and goals
in engineering: Utility for women and students at historically Black universities.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52, 84–92.
Lent, R. W., Lopez, A. M., Lopez, F. G., & Sheu, H. B. (2008). Social cognitive
career theory and the prediction of interests and choice goals in the computing
disciplines. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73, 52–62.
Lent, R. W., & Sheu, H. B. (2009). Applying social cognitive career theory across
cultures: Empirical status. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M.
Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural counseling (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.

242

Career Development and Counseling

Leong, F. T. L. (2001). The role of acculturation in the career adjustment of Asian
American workers: A test of Leong and Chou’s (1994) formulations. Cultural
Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 7, 262–273.
Leong, F. T. L., Austin, J. T., Sekaran, U., & Komarraju, M. (1998). An evaluation
of the cross-cultural validity of Holland’s theory: Career choices by workers in
India. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 52, 441–455.
Leong, F. T. L., & Chou, E. L. (1994). The role of ethnic identity and acculturation
in the vocational behavior of Asian Americans: An integrative review. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 44, 155–172.
Leong, F. T. L., Hardin, E. E., & Gupta, A. (2011). Self in vocational psychology: A
cultural formulation approach. In P. J. Hartung & L. M. Subich (Eds.), Developing
self in work and career: Concepts, cases, and contexts (pp. 193–211) Washington, DC:
APA. doi:10.1037/12348-012
Leong, F. T. L., & Hartung, P. J. (1997). Career assessment with culturally different clients: Proposing an integrative-sequential conceptual framework for
cross-cultural career counseling research and practice. Journal of Career Assessment,
5, 183–201.
Leong, F. T. L., & Pearce, M. (2011). Desiderata: Towards indigenous models of
vocational psychology. International Journal for Educational and Vocational Guidance,
11(2), 65–77. doi:10.1007/s10775-011-9198-z
Leung, S. A. (1995). Career development and counseling: A multicultural perspective.
In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook
of multicultural counseling (pp. 549–566). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lovelace, K., & Rosen, B. (1996). Differences in achieving person–organization
ﬁt among diverse groups of managers. Journal of Management, 22(5), 703–722.
doi:10.1177/014920639602200502
Luzzo, D., & Hutcheson, K. (1996). Causal attributions and sex differences associated
with perceptions of occupational barriers. Journal of Counseling & Development, 75,
124–130.
Luzzo, D., & McWhirter, E. (2001). Sex and ethnic differences in the perception of
educational and career-related barriers and levels of coping efﬁcacy. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 79, 61.
Lyons, H. Z., & O’Brien, K. M. (2006). The role of person–environment ﬁt in the
job satisfaction and tenure intentions of African American employees. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 53(4), 387–396. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.53.4.387
McWhirter, E. H. (1997). Perceived barriers to education and career: Ethnic and
gender differences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50, 124–140.
McWhirter, E. H., Hackett, G., & Bandalos, D. L. (1998). A causal model of the
educational plans and career expectations of Mexican American high school girls.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45, 166–181.
McWhirter, E. H., Torres, D. M., Salgado, S., & Valdez, M. (2007). Perceived barriers
and postsecondary plans in Mexican American and White adolescents. Journal of
Career Assessment, 15, 119–138.
Metz, A. J., Fouad, N., & Ihle-Helledy, K. (2009). Career aspirations and expectations
of college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 17, 155–171.

The Role of Race and Ethnicity in Career Choice, Development, and Adjustment

243

Navarro, R. L., Flores, L. Y., & Worthington, R. L. (2007). Mexican American middle
school students’ goal intentions in mathematics and science: A test of social
cognitive career theory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 320–335.
Ojeda, L., & Flores, L. Y. (2008). The inﬂuence of gender, generation level, parent’s
education level, and perceived barriers on the educational aspirations of Mexican
American high school students. Career Development Quarterly, 57, 84–95.
Pearson, S. M., & Bieschke, K. J. (2001). Succeeding against the odds: An examination
of familial inﬂuences on the career development of professional African American
women. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48, 301–309.
Rivera, L. M., Chen, E. C., Flores, L. Y., Blumberg, F., & Ponterotto, J. G. (2007).
The effects of perceived barriers, role models, and acculturation on the career
self-efﬁcacy and career consideration of Hispanic women. Career Development
Quarterly, 56, 47–61.
Rounds, J., & Hesketh, B. (1994). The theory of work adjustment: Unifying principles
and concepts. In M. L. Savikas & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in career development
theories: Implications for science and practice (pp. 177–186). Palo Alto, CA: CPP.
Savickas, M. L. (2011). Theories of psychotherapy series. Career counseling. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development
(3rd ed., pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Swanson, J. L., & Woitke, M. B. (1997). Theory into practice in career assessment
for women: Assessment and interventions regarding perceived career barriers.
Journal of Career Assessment, 5, 443–462.
Tang, M., Fouad, N. A., & Smith, P. L. (1999). Asian Americans’ career choices: A
path model to examine factors inﬂuencing their career choices. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 54, 142–157.
Tracey, T. J., & Rounds, J. (1993). Evaluating Holland’s and Gati’s vocational-interest
models: A structural meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 229
Tsabari, O., Tziner, A., & Meir, E. I. (2005). Updated meta-analysis on the relationship
between congruence and satisfaction. Journal of Career Assessment, 13, 216–232.
U.S. Department of Education, Institute on Education Sciences. (2011). National
Center on Education Statistics. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/
Waller, B. (2006). Math interest and choice intentions of non-traditional AfricanAmerican college students. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 538–547.
Westbrook, B. W., Buck, R. W., Jr., Wynne, D. C., & Sanford, E. (1994). Career maturity
in adolescence: Reliability and validity of self-ratings of abilities by gender and ethnicity. Journal of Career Assessment, 2(2), 125–161. doi:10.1177/106907279400200203
Young, R. A., Marshall, S. K., & Valach, L. (2007). Making career theories more
culturally sensitive: Implications for counseling. Career Development Quarterly,
56(1), 4–18.

CHAPTER 9

Social Class, Poverty, and
Career Development
CINDY L. JUNTUNEN, SABA RASHEED ALI, AND KIPP R. PIETRANTONIO

T

specialists to attend more fully to the needs of
people living with limited ﬁnancial or social means has been made
repeatedly (Blustein, 2006; Blustein, McWhirter, & Perry, 2005;
Diemer & Ali, 2009; Fouad & Brown, 2000; Sloan, 2005). In the current
climate of economic downturn in the United States and around the world,
the need for career counselors to grapple with poverty and class issues
is starkly apparent. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau reported that
the number of Americans living in poverty in 2010 exceeded 46 million
(or 15%), the largest number since poverty estimates have been reported
(DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, & Smith, 2011). In 2010, 10.4 million Americans
were identiﬁed as ‘‘working poor,’’ meaning that their income was below
the federal poverty level even though they spent at least 27 weeks of the
year working or looking for work (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2011a). In fact, current trends suggest that poverty is now
more likely to be experienced as working poverty than as nonworking
poverty (Caputo, 2007).
Despite such acute conditions and the underlying chronic nature of differential social class and wealth distribution in the United States, the inﬂuence
of social class and poverty in career development continues to be understudied relative to other social identity factors such as race, gender, and
sexual orientation. In this way, career development theory has been consistent with the broader domains of psychology and the counseling literature.
Scholars have suggested that limited progress in examining social class in
the larger ﬁelds of psychology and counseling may be related to numerous factors, including the American taboo against discussing social class
HE CALL FOR CAREER

245

246

Career Development and Counseling

(Liu, 2011), unexamined social class biases among providers (Smith, 2005,
2010; Smith & Mao, 2012), and distancing from the poor through cognitions, behaviors, and institutional policies (Lott, 2002). Through these
and related mechanisms, career counselors and vocational psychologists
may recapitulate the invisibility of the working poor in American society
(Shipler, 2005).
Fortunately, career scholars are beginning to challenge the status quo by
actively addressing social class and poverty in career counseling interventions and research. Social class inﬂuences preparation for and entrance into
the labor market, making it inextricably linked with career development
(Diemer & Ali, 2009). Further, access to work and its resulting resources
are important components of social mobility in the United States (Fouad &
Fitzpatrick, 2009). Career counselors are therefore in a unique position to
have a positive impact on the lives of individuals and families living with
limited resources, but only if they are able to effectively integrate social class
issues into their treatment planning and interventions.
The integration of social class into career counseling can be challenging
because of the lack of clarity in identifying what is actually meant by social
class (Liu, 2011; Liu, Ali, et al., 2004). Social class is frequently equated with
socioeconomic status (SES), which can be assessed as a function of income,
education, and occupation (Hollingshead, 1975). More complex considerations of social class include the experience of class as a worldview (Liu,
Soleck, Hopps, Dunston & Pickett, 2004), access to resources and education
(Blustein, Juntunen, & Worthington, 2000), and complex interactions of multiple indicators of social status (Brown et al., 2002). A full discussion of social
class must include groups with sufﬁcient and even signiﬁcant resources,
and there is some evidence that individuals who are identiﬁed as privileged
(i.e., wealthy, upper or upper-middle class) may also confront important
issues that limit their career options (Lapour & Heppner, 2009). However,
people with limited incomes are both more likely to be in need of vocational resources and less likely to have them. Given that reality, this chapter
focuses primarily on working with clients living with lower social status,
fewer economic resources, and less job security, including the working poor
and the unemployed.
Given the profound link between social class, poverty, and career development (Diemer & Ali, 2009), it is critical that career specialists develop
a foundational understanding of the inﬂuence of social class on access to
and achievement in the world of work. Further, it is necessary to assess
the tools already at our disposal to work effectively with clients from
less privileged backgrounds and to improve our ability by adding new
and relevant knowledge and skills. The major career theories presented
in the ﬁrst chapters of this text have attended to social class to varying

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

247

degrees. This chapter presents a brief critique of each theory’s consideration of social class and offers suggestions for theory development that can
improve applicability to clients of varying social class status. For career
counselors to work effectively with social class issues, they need to have
some familiarity with the sociological and social work perspectives related
to social class, as well as vocational and career development perspectives.
To that end, this chapter offers a discussion of different perspectives on
social class, drawing from sociological and psychological theories. We then
review the existing empirical literature relevant to the inﬂuence of class
issues on work and vocational behavior across the life span, including literature from social work that is directly relevant to working with career
counseling clients living with limited means. The chapter concludes with
speciﬁc suggestions for practitioners, designed to increase both understanding of class and poverty issues and the usefulness and relevance of
career interventions.
CONSIDERATION OF SOCIAL CLASS AND POVERTY IN MAJOR
CAREER DEVELOPMENT THEORIES
Extant career theory has paid limited explicit attention to the life and
struggles of working-class people. From 2005 to 2009, over 6 million jobs were
lost in the United States alone. Tragically, the state of career development
theory may not be prepared for this type of economic shift, which results
in signiﬁcant personal distress and potential for subsequent mental health
concerns. Socioeconomic issues are generally an afterthought or considered
a ‘‘frictional factor’’ (Dawis, 2005, p. 15) to psychological theory, including
vocational psychology theory. Blustein (2006), in contrast, argues that not
only are SES issues relevant but also they are the inherent cornerstone
of why individuals work. He describes work as a means of survival and a
method of acquiring power within a culture. This description bears a striking
resemblance to what it means to participate in social class mobility, in that
Blustein is positing that people work to obtain the resources necessary for
moving from lower to higher social status.
Some aspects of career counseling theory may actually serve as a barrier
to meeting the needs of clients from a lower social status. That is, they
are inherently designed to help people ﬁnd work that is satisfying based
on various factors such as personality variables, interests, skills, abilities,
level of ambition, past achievements, work experience, and developmental
goals. These are important career development issues, but they may not be
adequate for addressing the unique concerns of people living in poverty
or lower socioeconomic status. Rarely does a career theory elaborate on
relevant issues such as preparing for employment with limited resources,

248

Career Development and Counseling

transitioning lifestyles, decreasing quality of life, vocational oppression
and discrimination, or working with little hope of promotion or long-term
employment. The expansion of career development theory to be inclusive
of real-life SES factors, and to stretch the continuum of career counseling
practices to address the relevant contextual factors related to socioeconomic
resources, is crucial to meeting the needs of people in the immediate and
long-term future.
Person–Environment Fit Theories
The ﬁrst and possibly most widely employed approach to career counseling
is person–environment (P-E) ﬁt theory, which posits the importance of
matching an individual’s values, abilities, and interests with characteristics
of a particular work environment. Both Holland’s (1997) RIASEC model
(see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume) and the Minnesota theory of work
adjustment (TWA; Dawis, 2005; Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this
volume) focus on the ﬁt between the individual and the work environment.
The RIASEC model has been subject to signiﬁcant research, and its tenets
have been generally corroborated across cultures (Day & Rounds, 1998;
Nauta, 2010). Many assessments and measures that are used daily in college
counseling centers, high school guidance ofﬁces, and government work
agencies are drawn from Holland’s theory.
TWA is also a widely used and empirically supported career theory. Dawis
(2005) outlined some of the underlying assumptions of the model. Advocates
of this theory believe that people have needs that have to be met and that
they will attempt to meet them through the work environment. Many of
the behaviors people engage in are an effort to meet these requirements.
Simultaneously, work environments also have needs, and if the person’s
skill set can satisfy the work environment’s needs, this will result in a state
of satisfactoriness. If the environment also meets the individual’s needs, this
will result in satisfaction for the employee.
Both Holland’s RIASEC model and TWA provide important information
about obtaining work that is likely to be satisfactory, based on individual
and work environment characteristics. Dawis and Lofquist (1984) have also
outlined the use of TWA for on-the-job adjustment and counseling for career
change. Further, Dawis (2005) outlined adjustment styles that individuals
apply when they feel their satisfaction is threatened. These are important
aspects of TWA and potentially have applicability for social class and poverty
issues, via averting the risk of unemployment. However, even within this
context, it is assumed that individuals will be given an opportunity to react
in order to improve their satisfactoriness or will at least be aware that their
employment may be in jeopardy. Although people do lose jobs as a result of

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

249

a lack of ‘‘ﬁt’’ or satisfactoriness, for an increasing number of employees the
risk of job loss is tied to external factors (e.g., organizational downsizing).
This economic reality creates a disconnect between theory and the experience
of employees. The assessments, interventions, and tools of P-E ﬁt theories
can be useful for clients with limited means and reduced opportunities for
employment, if wielded by counselors with a solid understanding of and
appreciation for the social context experienced by clients.
Developmental Career Theories
The career theory approaches of Donald Super (1990; Super, Savickas, &
Super, 1996; Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume), Mark Savickas (Chapter 6,
this volume), Linda Gottfredson (2005), and Vondracek, Lerner, and Schulenberg (1983) all address career development as an inherent part of human
development. They vary importantly in their attention to the social context of career development and speciﬁcally to the inﬂuence of social class
and poverty.
The ﬁeld of career counseling owes a debt of gratitude to Super (1990) for
his innovative ideas about career activities across the life span, which shifted
the focus from vocational guidance to career counseling and contributed
to important counseling skills. Nonetheless, his conceptual framework was
ensconced in the experience of White, male, middle-class individuals who
represented the dominant culture. Over time, Super (1990) began to integrate
a broader spectrum of life experiences, including those of women and
international populations. He also adjusted important constructs in his
theory to address social inﬂuences, particularly through attending to the need
to be prepared to recycle in careers. Despite these adjustments, neither Super
nor his colleagues directly addressed the needs of low-income individuals.
Career construction theory has also attended only minimally to social
class issues, although it, too, has the potential to address speciﬁc concerns
with its emphasis on career adaptability (Savickas, Chapter 6). Within career
construction theory, there is a fundamental assumption that individuals
are making active choices that create a career narrative. Savickas (2005)
states: ‘‘Careers do not unfold, they are constructed as individuals make
choices that express their self-concepts and substantiate their goals in the
social reality of work roles’’ (p. 43). Unfortunately, careers in the lives of
low-income people often do ‘‘unfold,’’ but are reactions of necessity rather
than choice. The fundamental belief that people have the choice to construct
a narrative as opposed to having a narrative imposed on them is a major
oversight of career construction theory. This is not to say that individuals
lack agency as a personal characteristic, but that the choices that lead to the
construction of the narrative may be much more forced than is assumed

250

Career Development and Counseling

by the notion that individuals constructing a career narrative are seeking to
express their identity.
Savickas (2005) also asserts that, regardless of SES, most people can
ﬁnd opportunities in their work to both express themselves and make a
contribution. However, previous research (Halle, 1984) has indicated that
working-class jobs are distant from the decision-making process, which
suggests that self-expression may have less inﬂuence for those employed
in the working class. This undoubtedly has an effect on an individual’s
ability to construct meaning and purposefulness around their vocational
identity. The concern here is that the level of agency, or volition, within
this expression may differ dramatically as a function of SES (Blustein, 2006).
Simply looking at a work wardrobe can express this clear difference. A
middle-class individual working a white-collar ofﬁce job may be able to
pick out various professional outﬁts that express who they are, select a
different one each day depending on their mood or the tasks ahead, and
display them as a competent professional. In contrast, individuals who
work in low-income service jobs may only be able to express individuality
through the color of undershirt beneath their uniforms, the choice of their
full or shortened name on their nametag, or their choice of which black
nonslip shoes they choose to purchase. This speaks to an individual’s selfdetermination of the decision-making power around career construction and
the degree of control a worker has in everyday life.
Gottfredson (2005) proposed that career interests develop through critical
advances in the understanding of social space that occurs throughout childhood. She explicitly addressed social class through her attention to the role
of social valuation in the process of circumscription and compromise. Specifically, she hypothesized that children start to rule out work opportunities
based on their social value by the ages of 9 to early teens. Interestingly, this is
approached from the perspective of setting the ﬂoor on possible job options
(i.e., those that are ‘‘too low’’) by ruling out work that is ‘‘unacceptably
low in social standing’’ (2005, p. 79). Gottfredson does clearly link this to
community norms and reference groups, acknowledging, for example, that
youth from working-class families are going to have a different perspective
than those from middle-class families. The upper boundary of possible job
options is assumed to be determined by the effort one is willing to invest,
such that the decision about whether to pursue jobs of great social value
revolves around whether that pursuit is too hard. This assumption may
allow a counselor to overlook the possibility that a client of lower social
status may actually be ruling out higher-valued jobs because they seem
too high in social standing (i.e., no one in the client’s reference group has
ever had that job), rather than too hard to obtain (i.e., capable of doing
the work).

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

251

Finally, Vondracek and colleagues (1986) proposed a career life span development model that explicitly examines the interaction of the individual and
his or her social context. A basic assumption of this approach is that the
individual and the environment in which he or she exists are viewed as
changing interdependently over time (Vondracek & Lerner, 1982), which has
interesting implications for thinking about clients dealing with the external
forces of the labor market and national and global economies. Career life span
development is heavily inﬂuenced by the ecological human development
theory proposed by Bronfenbrenner (1993). Bronfenbrenner conceptualized
an ecological system consisting of four major subsystems, which interact to
inﬂuence human development. These subsystems include (a) the microsystem, which consists of the interpersonal interactions that occur in a given
setting, such as home, school, work, or social group; (b) the mesosystem, in
which two or more microsystem environments interact, such as the relationship between work and home; (c) the exosystem, the social structures and
linkages that indirectly impact individuals, such as community resources or
neighborhood characteristics; and (d) the macrosystem, which is most distal
from the individual and includes the norms and values of the larger society.
This approach to development can easily be transferred to career development for lower-income and poor individuals, who are often in the situation
of having to respond and adapt to numerous forces outside their control.
Several vocational scholars (Brown et al., 1996; Heppner & O’Brien, 2006;
Young, 1983) have argued that the ecological framework is a valid tool for
addressing the vocational issues presented by social class and poverty.
Social Learning Theories
Career counseling theories that speciﬁcally address the inﬂuence of social
factors are, not surprisingly, more likely to have included considerations
of social class and poverty, and they also address the systems and settings
identiﬁed in the ecological approach. Two speciﬁc theories worthy of note in
this arena are social learning theory (Krumboltz, 1979) and social cognitive
career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994; Lent, Chapter 5, this
volume). Krumboltz (1979) identiﬁed four variables that contributed to identifying and making decisions about vocational goals: genetic endowments
and special abilities, environmental situations and events, associative and
instrumental learning experiences, and task approach skills. The explicit
attention to genetic endowments, including sex, race, and special abilities,
provided a framework for examining differences in vocational attainment
across sex, racial/ethnic, and other biologically identiﬁed groups of career
decision makers. It is the inclusion of social and cultural factors, such as
geography, legislation, labor market forces, family factors, and educational

252

Career Development and Counseling

settings that both sets social learning theory apart from previous vocational
theories and makes it theoretically useful for considering social class and
poverty issues.
Social learning theory explicitly recognizes that individual interests or
choices are not the only determinants of vocational attainment. This set the
stage both for understanding factors that contribute to self-efﬁcacy, which
has become a critical consideration in understanding social class inﬂuence
on vocational behavior, and for addressing the systems of the ecological
development theory (Bronfenbrenner, 1993). Social learning theory did not
address speciﬁc counseling goals. But more recently, in presenting happenstance learning theory (HLT), Krumboltz (2009) proposed: ‘‘The goal of
career counseling is to help clients learn to take actions to achieve more
satisfying career and personal lives—not to make a single career decision’’ (p. 135). This focus on helping clients learn to take action, combined
with an understanding of social determinants, can contribute to developing
effective interventions.
SCCT is a theory that takes into account many of the issues discussed
throughout the chapter so far and does so in the form of distal, proximal,
and background factors that may inﬂuence individuals’ career choices (Lent,
Chapter 5, this volume). As of yet, social class factors appear to be underexamined in SCCT theory and research (Lent, Brown & Hackett, 2000), at
least relative to other contextual factors. Further, the focus on vocational
interests as contributing to goals and actions does not fully address the
reality of individuals who either do not have the option of making decisions
based on their interests or do not have the resources to explore interests.
However, the potential for SCCT theory to be inclusive of social class and
poverty factors has been clearly articulated (Diemer & Ali, 2009; Fouad &
Fitzpatrick, 2009).
SCCT does explicitly acknowledge that the expression of interests is not
the only avenue by which career goals are set and work-seeking behaviors
are initiated. In fact, the constructs of self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations
may directly predict goals and behaviors. For example, an individual whose
primary concern is survival may identify work that he or she feels capable of
doing and that will result in a livable wage, regardless of whether the nature
of that work is inherently interesting or rewarding. As is demonstrated in the
upcoming section of this chapter focused on career development milestones
research, both SCCT and the core construct of self-efﬁcacy have played
important roles in understanding the inﬂuence of social class on academic
and vocational achievement. Additional and intensive focus on individuals
living in poverty or at lower levels of social class may allow adjustments
to the theory that will make the SCCT model more inclusive and relevant
across social status.

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

253

Summary of Career Theory and Social Class
The attention to social class and poverty clearly varies across career theories.
The effects of outsourcing, globalization, and global recession are largely
overlooked in career theory but are very relevant in career counseling.
This requires that career counselors integrate knowledge and perspectives
outside of vocational theory to be as effective as possible in their work with
clients. To that end, the next section of this chapter addresses perspectives on
social class and poverty that have been developed both inside and outside
of career theory but can be brought to bear on these critical questions.
ADDITIONAL PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL CLASS AND POVERTY
There are numerous ways to consider social class, social status, and socioeconomic status (Diemer & Ali, 2009). We begin with a discussion of sociological
perspectives that anchor an understanding of socioeconomic status and social
class. This is followed by an emerging vocationally informed perspective,
the measurement of differential status identity (DSI; Brown et al., 2002;
Fouad & Brown, 2000). Blustein’s psychology of working perspective, which
infuses social class into vocational theory, is then explored. Both DSI and
the psychology of working perspective highlight the importance of understanding individual worldviews, which is addressed more fully through the
social class worldview model (Liu, Soleck, et al., 2004). The section concludes with a discussion of the factors that can limit career counseling with
poor populations.
Sociological Perspectives
Sociologists and economists generally focus on the macrolevel underpinnings of poverty and its relationship to work (Blustein, 2006; Corcoran, 1995).
These perspectives help to elucidate the systemic factors that contribute to
poverty. In particular, sociologists tend to stress the importance of ‘‘previous
generations of wealth and neighborhood characteristics’’ (Diemer & Ali,
2009, p. 254) and strongly argue that these have more inﬂuence in occupational attainment than is considered by more individualistic models of
career development.
The importance of past generation, neighborhood, and sociocultural inﬂuences was identiﬁed in a review of four sociological models (Corcoran,
1995): the resources model, the correlated disadvantages model, the welfare
culture model, and the underclass model. The resources model views the
transmission of poverty as being largely inﬂuenced by parental resources;
poor parents need to decide between putting resources into education and
other strategies for increasing social capital for their children versus pure

254

Career Development and Counseling

survival needs such as food and shelter. The correlated disadvantages model
is closely related, noting that poor parents are not just poor; they also have
less access to education and other resources themselves. The welfare culture
model posits that the government welfare system nurtures values, attitudes,
and behaviors that support a life in poverty. Finally, the underclass model
proposes that poor neighborhoods isolate their inhabitants from access to
other resources and that this is particularly inﬂuenced by joblessness.
Reviewing the empirical support for these models generated by a ﬂurry
of research attention in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Corcoran (1995) concluded that the economic resources model was the most likely to contribute
to generational poverty and that parental resources would predict the social
and economic capital of the next generation. This conclusion was supported
by multiple studies using large longitudinal data sets that demonstrated that
poor children, across racial groups (primarily African American and White),
had lower adult economic status and fewer educational and occupational
opportunities. Corcoran also noted that African American children were
more likely to live in families with lower economic resources and, even
when economic backgrounds were similar, were eventually less likely to do
well economically because of race-based employment discrimination.
There is contemporary evidence that generational wealth continues to contribute to the disparities between Whites and African Americans (Oliver &
Shapiro, 2006). Shapiro, Meschede, and Sullivan (2010) conducted research
and policy analysis on these discrepancies across decades and described
the ‘‘broken chain of achievement’’ (p. 2) that contributes to higher poverty
rates among African Americans. These authors concluded that the data
demonstrate very large disparities in accumulation of wealth between White
Americans and their African American counterparts within the same income
categories (i.e., comparing those in the same jobs). As a result of a history of unequal opportunity structures, African Americans cannot rely on
past generations to assist them with ﬁnancial needs, provide academic or
extracurricular experiences for their children, or assist them in times of
familial crisis. Further, in an economic crisis, African American families have
fewer resources to draw on if they are impacted by unemployment or disability (Ali, in press; Shapiro et al., 2010). This lack of generational wealth has
an aggregate impact over generations. Thus, despite traditional expectations
(e.g., that higher education leads to better-paying jobs), it is more difﬁcult for
African Americans to achieve the same wealth as their White counterparts
because of the cumulative effect of prior economic disadvantage.
Within the current career development literature, there has been little
attention to how economic factors such as generational wealth relate to
occupational attainment. Integrating sociological perspectives with career
development theories can provide a richer source of information that attends

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

255

to both the person aspects and the structural aspects of poverty and its relationship to occupational attainment and work. Attending to family economic
resources as a key contextual factor that inﬂuences the development of selfefﬁcacy, goals, and interests, as well as understanding of self and the world
of work, could help to inform career counseling. The following perspectives provide some guidance on how to integrate social status issues into
vocational perspectives.
Differential Status Identity
Recognizing the complex interaction between external, objective measures of
socioeconomic status and the internalized perceptions of social status, Fouad
and Brown (2000) proposed the concept of differential status identity (DSI)
to assess individuals’ perceptions of their own access to economic resources,
access to social power, and access to prestige, relative to others in society.
DSI therefore considers internalized perceptions of one’s gender, ethnicity,
socioeconomic resources, and other social identities and how these perceptions inﬂuence psychological and social well-being (Thompson & Subich,
2006). The constructs of DSI have been used to develop the Differential
Status Identity Scale (Brown et al., 2002), allowing some initial research on
this construct.
Preliminary research on DSI suggests that it might provide a promising
lens for understanding the impact of social class and poverty on career
development. For example, individuals raised in families with lower access
to economic resources reported experiencing more direct and systemic classism during their lifetimes than those raised in middle- and upper-class
families (Thompson & Subich, 2011). Further, DSI was directly related to
career decision self-efﬁcacy and career indecisiveness; speciﬁcally, individuals who perceived themselves as having less access to social power and
economic resources had higher levels of career indecision and lower levels
of self-efﬁcacy. Interestingly, institutional classism (i.e, the ways in which
social institutions, such as school, work, and government, treat individuals
differently based on real or perceived social class as reﬂected in norms,
regulations, and policies) was more likely to have a negative effect on DSI
than direct interpersonal classism (i.e., being treated differently by another
person due to real or perceived social class status), suggesting that it is the
systemic macrosystem inﬂuence of class that may be most deleterious.
Psychology of Working
The psychology of working (Blustein, 2006) is a multidisciplinary perspective
that attempts to integrate working as a life domain within the realm of human

256

Career Development and Counseling

development. Within this perspective, Blustein articulates the importance of
working for survival, relates this directly to issues of poverty, and argues
that a common theme among individuals ‘‘without grand career narratives’’
(or those living in poverty) is that work is viewed primarily as a means
of survival. Further, he draws from sociological literature to underscore
the importance of work as a means of providing structure for communities
and draws on Wilson’s (1996) work to illustrate the structural demise that
occurs in communities that lose major sources of employment, such as
manufacturing plants.
In line with his conclusions, Blustein (2006) issued a challenge to vocational
psychologists and career development theorists that more research is needed
on the experience of working for those who have the fewest economic
resources. Implicit within this discussion is the need to consider the structural
changes that are occurring in the current workforce that are contributing to
poverty rates. For example, recently the Center for Labor Market Studies
issued a policy brief that highlights the discrepancies between the afﬂuent
and those with limited economic resources as a result of the current economic
climate. Sum and Khatiwada (2010) reported that while individuals living in
the bottom of the income distribution in the United States faced a true labor
market depression, those within the top deciles of the income distribution
experienced full employment.
Social class discrepancies are an important consideration in the discussion
of the relationship between poverty and work. Blustein (2006) asserts that
classism often operates as a barrier to occupational attainment and deserves
more attention within the vocational psychology and career counseling
literature. Blustein notes that the social class worldview model (SCWM; Liu,
Soleck, et al., 2004) offers promise in expanding the psychology of working
perspective by integrating classism as a form of oppression.
Social Class Worldview Model
Although not a vocational theory, SCWM (Liu, Soleck, et al., 2004) has
broad implications for understanding how social class and poverty affect
access to occupational opportunities. SCWM focuses on the meaning and
importance of individuals’ subjective experiences and deﬁnitions of social
class and classism. SWCM also posits that all people belong to an economic
culture and experience pressure to meet the expectations placed on them by
their economic culture, through behaving in certain ways or having certain
possessions (Liu, Soleck, et al., 2004).
Classism, which is central to SCWM, is deﬁned as prejudice and discrimination directed at people engaged in behaviors not congruent with the
values and expectations of their economic culture. Classism can be directed:

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

257

(a) upward (negative feelings toward those perceived to be snobs and elitists), (b) downward (negative feelings toward those perceived as worse
off), (c) laterally (classism directed at people perceived as similar to oneself,
for example, keeping up with the Joneses), and (d) internally as internalized classism (emotional and cognitive difﬁculty experienced by individuals
when they fail to meet the demands of their economic culture). Individuals
tend to unconsciously internalize class-related messages (Liu, Soleck, et al.,
2004), which can subsequently impact their work expectations or beliefs.
Liu and Ali (2008) outlined a four-step model that can facilitate exploration of class experiences for individuals living in poverty. Ali, Fall, and
Hoffman (in press) applied this model to working with individuals who
are unemployed and experience social status changes. The four-step model
(Liu & Ali, 2008) proposes the following: (a) assist the client to identify and
understand his or her economic culture and the types of messages received
about working or losing one’s job; (b) assist the client to explore how these
messages may have affected current occupational choices; (c) identify the
client’s experiences with classism (e.g., internal, lateral, downward) and
encourage developing adaptive, realistic, and healthy expectations about
himself or herself by reviewing the client’s belief system regarding occupational choices; and (d) help the client challenge his or her experiences with
classism by reﬂecting on strong messages she or he received about work
and discussing how these messages impact current job search processes or
educational planning.
This four-step model can be used in conjunction with other theoretical
interventions, such as those based in SCCT. For example, it is common with
SCCT school-based career interventions to explore career barriers and their
impact on self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations. Using the current
model with students living in poverty to explore the types of classism they
experienced and to identify messages about work might be useful in helping
them make plans and identify support systems to overcome internal and
external class-related barriers. This model can be extended to help clients
understand how classist messages they have received related to work or
institutionalized experiences may have affected their work histories (Ali
et al., in press). Further, the model can also assist counselors to identify their
own social class biases related to working with individuals living in poverty.
We turn next to a discussion of how classism often operates as a barrier to
working with individuals living in poverty.
Barriers to Working With the Poor
Recently, several scholars have discussed the general lack of attention
to issues of poverty in the psychological literature (Lott, 2002; Smith &

258

Career Development and Counseling

Mao, 2012). Lott (2002) noted that when psychologists do write about
or research those living in poverty, they often conceptualize individuals’
concerns and problems from a distanced perspective that starkly contrasts
the experiences of those living in poverty with those of the middle-class norm,
resulting in a form of classism that excludes and discounts the experiences of
those living in poverty. Heppner and O’Brien (2006) argued that one of the
major barriers to providing services to this population is classism that results
from cognitive distancing, as described by Lott (2002). Often, this classism is
subtle and manifests itself in avoidance of individuals living in poverty.
Another barrier to providing vocational counseling for individuals living
in poverty is quite simply physical access to services. Smith (2010) argued
that if we want to help individuals living in poverty, then we need to provide
services in locations that are convenient to these clients. Further, Lott and
Bullock (2007) recommended that psychologists become more involved in
public policy efforts to rectify broken governmental systems such as TANF
(Temporary Assistance for Needy Families), commonly referred to as welfare
to work. By ﬁrst working with poor clients and conducting research that
delineates their needs, career counselors and vocational psychologists may
be in a better position to contribute to policy efforts.
The goal of contributing to policy efforts is daunting, given the myriad issues that have to be addressed. For example, Haley-Lock and Shah
(2007) articulated the numerous ways that government and private-sector
policies support the structure of low-wage employment that keeps up to
25% of the working population living in poverty. To effect policy change,
they suggest the need to (a) change public policies to better match job and
worker characteristics (e.g., expanding criteria for unemployment insurance
so that leaving work for a valid reason does not make a worker ineligible or
extending the deﬁnition of dependents qualifying for Family and Medical
Leave Act), (b) reduce the vulnerabilities that accompany minimum wage
policies (e.g., by expanding the beneﬁts of the earned income tax credit), and
(c) expand the opportunities available to workers in lower-wage work (e.g.,
by increasing access to child care or health care or encouraging skill development of lower-wage workers). Although individual career counselors
may not be able to effect these changes, they can inform and contribute
through collective advocacy with local, state, and national policy makers
and employers.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL CLASS AND POVERTY ON CAREER
DEVELOPMENT MILESTONES
Following a brief ﬂurry of research in the 1970s and 1980s on the relationship
of SES to such career factors as vocational maturity (Dillard, 1976), work

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

259

task complexity (MacKay & Miller, 1982), and occupational choice (Hannah
& Khan, 1989), vocational research on SES and social class diminished. A
resurgence occurred in the early 2000s, likely in response to increased awareness of SES and poverty issues following the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (welfare-to-work legislation) of 1996.
There has since been increasing research on the inﬂuence of social class, or at
least socioeconomic status, on academic achievement and aspirations, career
aspirations and expectations, access to employment, and work satisfaction
and performance.
Career Aspirations and Expectations in Youth
In 2009, 31 million children in the United States (42% of the child population)
lived in low-income families (Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2011), and the
proportion of children of color living in poverty is even greater (Edelman &
Jones, 2004). The inﬂuence of childhood poverty is persistent, as children
raised in low-income families are more likely to earn less as adults (Holzer,
Schanzenbach, Duncan, & Ludwig, 2007) and less likely than children in
higher-SES families to advance economically relative to their parents (Isaacs,
Sawhill, & Haskins, 2008). Shipler (2005) eloquently described the educational and work experiences of children living in working-poor families,
noting that the lack of ﬁnancial resources can exacerbate other concerns and
interrupt educational opportunities. ‘‘Money may not always cure, but it
can often insulate one problem from another’’ (p. 76). Children without the
insulation offered by ﬁnancial safety are more likely to have health concerns
and less likely to ﬂourish in school.
The impact on future college or work readiness can be seen as early as
entrance to elementary school, as children from lower-income families have
weaker math skills at the point of entrance to kindergarten and demonstrate
less growth in math skills than do children from middle-income families
(Jordan & Levine, 2009). Similarly, lower-income children demonstrate lower
reading abilities both at entrance to school and at the end of third grade,
which is associated with a greater likelihood of dropout from high school
(Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2010). Among undergraduate college students,
stereotype threat (i.e., the risk of conﬁrming a negative stereotype about
the social group to which one belongs; Steele & Aronson, 1995) has also
been identiﬁed as a source of decreased performance on tests presented as
diagnostic of ability for students of lower SES backgrounds (Croizet & Claire,
1998). In other words, students of lower SES backgrounds performed more
poorly when the test was presented as a test of intellectual ability in which
they might represent their social group but equally well when the same test
was presented as nondiagnostic.

260

Career Development and Counseling

SES has also been identiﬁed as having a complex effect on adolescent
aspirations and expectations for work and education. Consistent with an
ecological approach to adolescent vocational development (Young, 1983),
the ﬁndings of this body of research suggest that it is difﬁcult to separate
SES effects from parental inﬂuences, which are in turn inﬂuenced by school
and other social inﬂuences. For example, in a qualitative study of work
perspectives among urban youth (Chaves et al., 2004), the authors posited
that ‘‘there may be a deep connection between how work is viewed in one’s
family and by the adolescent themselves’’ (p. 284). They found that the
ninth-grade youth in their study often had relatively bleak perspectives on
work based on family messages and saw work as a pathway to survival
rather than a means of personal satisfaction or self-expression, as is often
assumed in career theory.
In a large (N > 9,000) longitudinal study in Great Britain, socioeconomic disadvantage was identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant deterrent to academic
potential, but this effect was moderated by teacher expectations, as well as
parental involvement and aspirations of the parent for the child (Schoon,
Parsons, & Sacker, 2004). That is, the relation between disadvantage and
academic potential was substantially lower among children whose teachers
and parents expected them to succeed and whose parents were educationally
involved and had high aspirations for their children. In another study of
272 adolescents (ages 11–15) in Rome, mothers’ aspirations for their children
and self-efﬁcacy beliefs, regardless of SES, were most predictive of academic
aspirations and occupational choices of the children (Bandura, Barbaranelli,
Caprara, & Pastorelli, 2001).
Mixed ﬁndings have emerged from research in a different cultural context,
that of the rural Appalachian region of the United States (Ali & McWhirter,
2006; Ali & Saunders, 2006). In one study (Ali & Saunders, 2006), student self-efﬁcacy and parental support predicted expectations to attend
college after high school, more so than socioeconomic status as measured
by parental education and occupation. In another study, students from
lower-SES backgrounds perceived more barriers to attending college, had
lower self-efﬁcacy about attending college, and expected to work full-time
upon completion of high school (Ali & McWhirter). The authors noted that
these students may have had limited encouragement to attend college, as
well as little information about opportunities for ﬁnancial aid and other
barrier-reducing resources.
Across these diverse studies, self-efﬁcacy of mothers (beliefs that they
can help their children academically) and students (beliefs that they can
accomplish necessary educational tasks) emerges as a construct that is core
to shaping the aspirations of low-income youth. Researchers have also
examined other facilitative factors, speciﬁcally sociopolitical development

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

261

and hope. Diemer and his colleagues (Diemer, 2009; Deimer & Hsieh, 2008;
Diemer, Hsieh, & Pan, 2009; Diemer et al., 2010) have examined the ways
in which critical consciousness and sociopolitical development (SPD) might
augment career exploration and aspirations among poor youth of color by
fostering increased self-determination and agency. Critical consciousness
refers to ‘‘the capacity to recognize and overcome sociopolitical barriers’’
(Diemer & Blustein, 2006, p. 220), such as oppression and discrimination.
SPD includes being conscious of sociopolitical oppression and being motivated to engage in social action to change it (Watts, Grifﬁth, & Abdul-Adil,
1999). Although inquiry in this area is relatively new, there are indications
that critical consciousness can contribute to greater commitment to pursuing
a career in the future and to clearer vocational identity among urban adolescents (Diemer & Blustein, 2006). Other ﬁndings suggest that SPD contributes
to both work salience and vocational expectations among high school students (Diemer et al., 2010) and may contribute to reducing the disparity
between vocational aspirations (ideal career) and expectations (expected
career) among lower-SES adolescents of color (Diemer & Hsieh, 2008).
Work hope (Juntunen & Wettersten, 2006) and vocational hope (Diemer &
Blustein, 2007) have been the focus of a small number of investigations.
In the development of the Work Hope Scale, work hope was shown to
detect differences between populations with differential access to ﬁnancial
resources, leading the authors to conclude that it may contribute to a unique
understanding of the internal factors contributing to work behaviors among
economically disenfranchised youth and adults (Juntunen & Wettersten,
2006). Subsequent use of the Work Hope Scale has suggested that work hope
contributes uniquely and signiﬁcantly to achievement-related beliefs among
high school students (Kenny, Walsh-Blair, Blustein, Bempechat, & Seltzer,
2010) and career decision making among Ukrainian college students, which
the authors posited may reﬂect a positive relationship between self-esteem
and personal agency (Yakushko & Sokolova, 2010).
Obtaining Employment
Career theory and research tend to focus more heavily on the processes by
which people prepare for, select, and maintain careers and attend less to the
actual steps involved in obtaining work or looking for a job. Two exceptions
to this are examination of the school-to-work transition and the welfare-towork transition, which has also been studied by social work researchers.
The salience of social class in the transition from welfare to work is readily
apparent, as is the lack of economic resources that necessitated the original
receipt of welfare. The school-to-work transition is arguably a transition
that most young adults experience but in the context of the current chapter

262

Career Development and Counseling

represents the transition from high school to work navigated by youth who
are not bound for college, which is often associated with limited economic
resources (Blustein et al., 2000).
In a qualitative study of young adults making the transition from school
to work, Blustein et al. (2002) found that low-SES youth experienced more
educational barriers and had fewer educational resources than did high-SES
youth. Low-SES youth also had less career guidance from parents, were less
likely to engage in career self-exploration, and were less likely to actively plan
for their future. The authors concluded that social class ‘‘affects the context
of the STW transition and also inﬂuences how people feel about themselves
and their work lives’’ (p. 322). In another qualitative study exploring the
relationship between sociocultural factors and college attendance, Lehmann
(2004) found that working-class youth planning to attend college perceived
the experience as riskier and more tenuous than youth whose parents had
attended college. In contrast, working-class youth who were pursuing work
through apprenticeship expressed greater enthusiasm about their planned
work experience. The author concluded that the school-to-work transition
might replicate preexisting social inequalities but cautioned that this need not
be seen as purely a limitation if the individual is intentional and self-aware
in the process, offering an opportunity for career counseling interventions to
address such inequality.
In a longitudinal study drawn from the Youth Development Study (Mortimer, 2003), the job search activity, employment status, and hourly wages of
more than 1,000 youth were assessed over a 13-year period that included the
school-to-work transition (Vuolo, Staff, & Mortimer, 2011). Socioeconomic
factors were not found to predict employment status or income. However,
parental education, which is an indicator of family social class, was related
to higher levels of agency in the job pursuit process, and high agency
was in turn related to higher hourly salary and less unemployment. The
authors suggest that agency, or agentic striving, may foster resiliency that
supports the school-to-work transition even in times of economic difﬁculty.
The job search for recipients of welfare (TANF) is complicated by numerous
barriers. In one longitudinal study of more than 1,000 TANF recipients in
a metropolitan area, 89% of the sample endorsed at least one of a set of
10 potential barriers identiﬁed by the researchers (Dworsky & Courtney,
2007): lack of high school diploma or GED (57%), met diagnostic criteria for
depression (47%), health concerns (25%), mental health concerns during the
past year (22%), disability (21%), having an infant under 1 year old (20%),
being in an abusive relationship in the past year (15%), never held a previous
job (9%), caring for family member with a disability (8%), and substance
abuse within last year (6%). Further, 80% of the sample reported having two
or more barriers. Note that the researchers did not assess potential access

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

263

barriers, such as having transportation or child care available, which have
also been identiﬁed as common concerns (Haley-Lock & Shah, 2007; Juntunen
et al., 2006) and could make other barriers even more challenging to navigate.
Dworsky and Courtney (2007) found that participants who endorsed barriers
were less likely to be employed than those without barriers and were also
more likely to earn a lower wage when they did work; these effects were
increased as barriers multiplied.
To support the transition from welfare to work, federal and state dollars
ﬁnance a variety of employment services agencies. The outcomes of the
interventions provided by such agencies are mixed and can vary signiﬁcantly
in response to state and local labor market issues. Beimers and Fischer (2007)
found that the services provided to TANF recipients had little effect on either
entrance to employment or salary, with the exception of job development
activities. Getting leads to speciﬁc jobs, which was supported by strong
relationships between the service agency and employers, was the best
contributor to obtaining and maintaining employment. The authors also
noted that it is important to tailor services to the individual needs of TANF
recipients. This echoes ﬁndings from a large evaluation of TANF programs
(Gueron & Hamilton, 2002), in which the authors concluded that adopting
a rigid one-size-ﬁts-all approach was less successful than programs that
included a mix of training and job search activities that best ﬁt the needs of
individual participants.
Of particular importance to career counselors, Gueron and Hamilton (2002)
concluded that there is a clear need for welfare-to-work transition programs
to include skills-enhancing activities and for programs that foster career
advancement, in addition to meeting the goal of obtaining initial employment. Such recommendations clearly anchor welfare-to-work interventions
within the realm of career counseling, although relatively few such programs
have been developed. One example of a community-based welfare-to-work
career intervention was developed by Juntunen and colleagues (2006). The
program, called Project HOPE, was designed around interventions for families that targeted self-exploration and goal setting, increased self-efﬁcacy,
and speciﬁc job search skills. Parents and children met in parallel groups,
and both participated in career-relevant activities. Adult participants demonstrated a decrease in depression following participation. No direct effect was
found for vocational identity, but depression was negatively correlated with
vocational identity, suggesting that there may have been an indirect effect.
Work Role Salience, Satisfaction, and Performance
Limited research examines the correlation between social class and the
experience of work obtained, but some relationships have been identiﬁed.

264

Career Development and Counseling

In a review of the literature on career development and social class in
the early 1990s (Brown et al., 1996), the authors concluded that workers
of lower social class saw the work role as less salient or central to their
self-concept; experienced fewer psychological, ﬁnancial, or physical rewards
from work; and were more likely to have higher rates of absenteeism and
turnover. The authors were very cautious, however, in overgeneralizing
from these ﬁndings, given the small numbers of studies that examined
each issue.
Following the transition from welfare to work among 434 workers in Illinois, Scott (2006) identiﬁed high levels of job satisfaction, as approximately
80% of respondents reported being satisﬁed or very satisﬁed with work.
Interestingly, participants who had received TANF assistance for longer
periods of time reported higher levels of satisfaction. Employment in a professional or technical area and higher wages were also important predictors
of satisfaction.
Performance in secondary education has also been linked to adult work
adjustment among individuals from lower social class backgrounds (Schoon
et al., 2004), leading the authors to suggest that disadvantaged youth who
‘‘prove themselves’’ in secondary education attain lasting beneﬁts that
support their work adjustment and health as adults.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE
The variety of considerations contributing to the complex relationships
between SES and vocational outcomes highlights the need to continue to
pursue scholarship that increases our understanding in this area. Nonetheless, together the studies reviewed here provide some implications for
practice that may be particularly useful for counselors and psychologists
addressing career aspirations and expectations. As part of the ecological
context in which career goals emerge, SES has the potential to serve as a
barrier, and appropriate interventions can alleviate the impact of this barrier.
Interventions With Youth
Given that youth from lower-income homes are less likely to have full exposure to educational and career opportunities, career counseling interventions
such as assessment and exploration of interests, values, and goals are likely
to prove very helpful. Such interventions need to be carefully balanced
with the counselor’s awareness of relevant social pressures experienced by
the client, including the potential for family ﬁnancial needs to outweigh
individual interests or choices.

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

265

Interventions should address speciﬁc barriers, such as having limited
knowledge of ﬁnancial aid and other resources that support higher education.
Relatedly, barriers can be addressed by exposing youth to adults from similar
backgrounds who have gone to college and still maintained meaningful ties
to their home communities (Ali & McWhirter, 2006), providing a potent
vicarious source of self-efﬁcacy.
Interventions that are designed to increase academic coping self-efﬁcacy,
work hope, and sociopolitical development among lower-income youth are
all likely to positively inﬂuence career attainment. These might include
increasing exposure to work through job-shadowing and supervised work
experiences, identifying goals and the steps necessary to navigate the pathways to those goals, engaging in critical analyses of social structures, and
developing strategies that empower youth to see themselves as agents of
change for both themselves and the larger social structure. Finally, interventions that include both parents and children may be particularly useful, given
the evidence that parental support is an important predictor of self-efﬁcacy
and career aspirations (Ali & Saunders, 2006; Bandura et al., 2001; Chaves
et al., 2004). The Annie E. Casey Foundation (2011) heavily emphasizes a
multigenerational response to preparing the next generation to move out
of poverty, noting that the entire family needs increased support to foster
children’s socioeconomic upward mobility.
Job-Seeking Assistance
Career counselors often assist individual clients in the job search process,
providing guidance through career assessment, understanding P-E ﬁt, and
identifying local resources for ﬁnding available jobs. The issues encountered by individuals of lower social class status may feel distinctly different,
and as the previous literature has addressed, the career counselor may need
to help clients with fewer economic resources manage a more complex set
of barriers. However, several suggestions for practice emerge from these
ﬁndings. First, it is important to identify the unique set of barriers faced
by the individual client (Dworsky & Courtney, 2007), including barriers
that are likely to be overlooked by counselors who work primarily with
middle-class clients, such as transportation, money for food and shelter,
and access to child care. Second, it is important for counselors to be familiar with the local employment services agencies and to collaborate with
them in identifying resources for clients. Further, career counselors and
psychologists can serve as consultants to help employment services agencies
infuse career development activities into their services (Juntunen & Bailey,
in press). Finally, interventions that focus on developing increased agency

266

Career Development and Counseling

and self-efﬁcacy are again relevant for the job search process and have the
potential to increase resiliency in the face of economic stressors.
Help With Work Adjustment
The very limited exploration of social class and attitudes toward work
among working adults offers few practice implications. However, the psychology of working perspective (Blustein, 2006) provides useful principles
for addressing issues related to survival and power, social connectedness,
and self-determination for workers. By addressing work as a central part
of the lived experience, counselors and psychologists are more able to provide integrated and holistic interventions with all clients. Such an approach
would consider attitudes toward work, satisfaction gained from work, and
the salience of work as part of career counseling. In providing services to
women living in poverty, Heppner and O’Brien (2006) described the need to
foster resiliency. Speciﬁcally, they encouraged counselors to work on a set of
ﬁve skills and attitudes presented by Bernard (1995) as central to resiliency:
social competence, problem-solving skills, critical consciousness, autonomy,
and sense of purpose.

CONCLUSIONS
Social class and poverty present signiﬁcant challenges to career counselors
and psychologists, yet the research demonstrates that numerous points
of leverage can be used to intervene in the multigenerational pattern of
sustained poverty. The following is a list of suggestions that career counselors
can implement to increase their ability to meet the needs of low-income and
poor families and to ensure that the profession does not overlook this
signiﬁcant and unfortunately growing population of clients.
1. Engage in self-awareness and reﬂectivity.
a. Career counselors need to examine their own classist beliefs.
b. Career counselors need to examine the tendency to distance or
protect themselves from poverty, as well as other barriers that might
be keeping them from working with the poor.
c. Career counselors need to increase their competency in social class
and poverty issues by reading broadly from the sociological and
social work literatures, in addition to the vocational literature.
2. Microsystem interventions for individuals, families, and groups.
a. Career counselors need to examine how clients perceive social
class, attending to the importance of perception as identiﬁed in

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

267

the differential status identity (Fouad & Brown, 2000) or social class
worldview (Liu, Soleck, et al., 2004) models.
b. Career counselors need to be prepared to intervene with family
systems, given the evidence of generational inﬂuence regarding
social class and poverty. Speciﬁcally, career counselors can work
with parents to help them identify ways to support the self-efﬁcacy
of their children.
c. Career counselors need to be prepared to assess individual barriers
(Dworsky & Courtney, 2007) to develop appropriately personalized
interventions.
d. Career counselors need to use validated career interventions, including assessments of interests, values, and goals, while attending to
the important inﬂuence of the contextual factors of social class and
poverty on client choices and options. Models such as that proposed
by Liu and Ali (2008) can be particularly helpful in integrating social
class issues into theory-driven career interventions.
e. Career counselors need to help clients explore resources such as
work hope (Juntunen & Wettersten, 2006) and resiliency to support
active engagement with career-seeking activities and goal setting.
f. Career counselors need to engage clients in sociopolitical development (Diemer et al., 2010) to help them to identify and think
critically about social factors and to understand ways in which they
can challenge sociocultural barriers, such as classism and oppression.
3. Exosystem interventions—community and regional systems.
a. Career counselors need to be familiar with, and preferably have collaborative relationships with, job service and employment services
training agencies in their community. Through these relationships,
counselors can promote the use of individualized approaches to
obtaining work, which have been demonstrated to be more successful than standardized government interventions (Gueron &
Hamilton, 2002).
b. Career counselors need to be willing to advocate with local employers to support programs and policies that facilitate employment
opportunities for clients.
c. Career counselors need to be prepared to work with local schools
to support and implement training programs that will promote
employment options for youth and young adults.
4. Macrosystem intervention—policy and governmental systems.
a. Career counselors need to advocate for policies, programs, and
resources that will support high-quality work for youth (Mortimer,
2003).

268

Career Development and Counseling

b. Career counselors need to get involved in government advocacy that
supports appropriate social services and living wages for workers.
c. Career counselors need to contribute to interventions and research
that can be shared with policy makers to demonstrate effective
programs that support sustainable employment for all.
REFERENCES
Ali, S. R. (in press). Poverty, social class, and working. In D. Blustein (Ed)., Handbook
of the psychology of working.
Ali, S. R., Fall, K., & Hoffman, T. D. (in press). Life without work: Understanding
social class changes and unemployment through theoretical integration. Journal of
Career Assessment.
Ali, S. R., & McWhirter, E. H. (2006). Rural Appalachian youth’s vocational/
educational post-secondary aspirations: Applying social cognitive career theory. Journal of Career Development, 33, 87–111. doi:2006-21280-00110.1177/089484
5306293347
Ali, S. R., & Saunders, J. L. (2006). College expectations of rural Appalachian
youth: An exploration of social cognitive career theory factors. Career Development
Quarterly, 55(1), 38–51.
Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2010). Early warning! Why reading by the end of third
grade matters. KIDS COUNT Special Report. Baltimore, MD: Author. Retrieved
from http://www.aecf.org/∼/media/Pubs/Initiatives/KIDS%20COUNT/123
/2010KCSpecReport/Special%20Report%20Executive%20Summary.pdf
Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2011). America’s children, America’s challenge: Promoting
opportunity for the next generation. Baltimore, MD: Author. Retrieved from http://
www.aecf.org/KnowledgeCenter/∼/media/Pubs/Initiatives/KIDS%20COUNT
/123/2011KIDSCOUNTDataBook/2011KCDB_FINAL_essay.pdf
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (2001). Self-efﬁcacy
beliefs as shapers of children’s aspirations and career trajectories. Child Development, 72(1), 187–206. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00273
Beimers, D., & Fischer, R. L. (2007). Pathways to employment: The experiences of
TANF recipients with employment services. Families in Society, 88(3), 391–400.
Bernard, B. (1995). Fostering resilience in children (Report No. EDO-PS-95-9). Champaign, IL: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Childhood Education.
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L., Chaves, A. P., Diemer, M. A., Gallagher, L. A., Marshall, K. G.,
Sirin, S., & Bhati, K. S. (2002). Voices of the forgotten half: The role of social class
in the school-to-work transition. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 49, 311–323.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.49.3.31110.1037/0022-0167.49.3.3112002-01965-004
Blustein, D. L., Juntunen, C. L., & Worthington, R. L. (2000). The school-to-work
transition: Adjustment challenges of the forgotten half. In S. D. Brown & R. W.

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

269

Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 435–470). New York,
NY: Wiley.
Blustein, D. L., McWhirter, E. W., & Perry, J. C. (2005). An emancipator communitarian approach to vocational development theory, research, and practice. Counseling
Psychologist, 33(2), 141–179. doi:10.1177/00110000042722682005-02090-001
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1993). The ecology of cognitive development: Research models
and fugitive ﬁndings. In R. H. Wozniak & K. Fischer (Eds.), Scientiﬁc environments
(pp. 3–44). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, M. T., D’Agruma, H., Brown, A., Sia, A., Yamini-Diouf, Y., Porter, S., & Ruiz
de Exparza, C. et al. (2002, August). Differential status identity: Construct, measurement, and initial validation. Symposium presented during the annual convention of
the American Psychological Association, Chicago.
Brown, M. T., Fukunaga, C., Umemoto, D., & Wicker, L. (1996). Annual review,
1990–1996: Social class, work, and retirement behavior. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 49, 159–189.
Caputo, R. K. (2007). Working and poor: A panel study of maturing adults in the
U.S. Families in Society, 88(3), 351–359.
Chaves, A., Diemer, M., Blustein, D., Gallagher, L., DeVoy, J., Casares, M., & Perry,
J. (2004). Conceptions of work: The view from urban youth. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 51, 275–286. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.51.3.275
Corcoran, M. (1995). Rags to rags: Poverty and mobility in the United States. Annual
Review of Sociology, 21, 237–267. doi:21.080195.001321
Croizet, J. C., & Claire, T. (1998). Extending the concept of stereotype threat to social
class: The intellectual underperformance of students from low socioeconomic
backgrounds. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 588–594.
Dawis, R. V. (2005). The Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment. In S. D. Brown,
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 3–23). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Day, S. X., & Rounds, J. (1998). Universality of vocational interest structure among
racial and ethnic minorities. American Psychologist, 53(7), 728–736. doi:10.1037
/0003-066X.53.7.728
DeNavas-Walt, C., Proctor, B. D., & Smith, J. C. (2011). Income, poverty, and
health insurance coverage in the United States: 2010. U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60-239 (RV). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Ofﬁce.
Diemer, M. A. (2009). Pathways to occupational attainment among poor youth of
color: The role of sociopolitical development. The Counseling Psychologist, 37(1),
6–35. doi:10.1177/0011000007309858
Diemer, M. A., & Ali, S. (2009). Integrating social class into vocational psychology:
Theory and practice implications. Journal of Career Assessment, 17(3), 247–265.
doi:10.1177/1069072708330462

270

Career Development and Counseling

Diemer, M. A., & Blustein, D. L. (2006). Critical consciousness and career development among urban youth. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68(2), 220–232.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2005.07.001
Diemer, M. A., & Blustein, D. L. (2007). Vocational hope and vocational identity:
Urban adolescents career development. Journal of Career Assessment, 15(1), 98–118.
doi:10.1177/1069072706294528
Diemer, M. A., & Hsieh, C. (2008). Sociopolitical development and vocational expectations among lower socioeconomic status adolescents of color. Career Development
Quarterly, 56(3), 257–267.
Diemer, M. A., Hsieh, C., & Pan, T. (2009). School and parental inﬂuences on sociopolitical development among poor adolescents of color. The Counseling Psychologist,
37(2), 317–344. doi:10.1177/0011000008315971
Diemer, M. A., Wang, Q., Moore, T., Gregory, S. R., Hatcher, K. M., & Voight, A. M.
(2010). Sociopolitical development, work salience, and vocational expectations
among low socioeconomic status African American, Latin American, and Asian
American youth. Developmental Psychology, 46(3), 619–635. doi:10.1037/a0017049
Dillard, J. M. (1976). Relationship between career maturity and self-concepts of
suburban and urban middle- and urban lower-class preadolescent Black males.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 9(3), 311–320. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(76)90058-0
Dworsky, A., & Courtney, M. E. (2007). Barriers to employment among TANF
applicants and their consequences for self-sufﬁciency. Families in Society, 88(3),
379–389.
Edelman, M. W., & Jones, J. M. (2004). Separate and unequal: America’s children, race, and poverty. Future of Children, 14(2), 134–137. doi:2004-2008300910.2307/1602800.
Fouad, N. A., & Brown, M. T. (2000). The role of race and social class in development:
Implications for counseling psychology. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 379–408). New York, NY: Wiley.
Fouad, N. A., & Fitzpatrick, M. E. (2009). Social class and work-related decisions:
Measurement, theory, and social mobility. Journal of Career Assessment, 17(3),
266–270. doi:10.1177/1069072708330677
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gueron, I. M., & Hamilton, G. (2002). The role of education and training in welfare
reform. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Haley-Lock, A., & Shah, M. (2007). Protecting vulnerable workers: How public
policy and private employers shape the contemporary low-wage work experience.
Families in Society, 88(3), 485–495.
Halle, D. (1984). America’s working man: Work, home, and politics among blue collar
property owners. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hannah, J. S., & Kahn, S. E. (1989). The relationship of socioeconomic status and
gender to the occupational choices of grade 12 students. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 34(2), 161–178. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(89)90012-2

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

271

Heppner, M. J., & O’Brien, K. M. (2006). Women and poverty: A holistic approach to
vocational interventions. In W. Walsh & M. J. Heppner (Eds.), Handbook of career
counseling for women (2nd ed., pp. 75–102). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL US: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hollingshead, A. A. (1975). Four-factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript,
Yale University, New Haven, CT.
Holzer, H. J., Schanzenbach, D. W., Duncan, G. J., & Ludwig, J. (2007). The economic
costs of poverty in the United States: Subsequent effects of children growing up
poor. National Poverty Center Working Paper Series, 07(04), 1–4.
Isaacs, J., Sawhill, I., & Haskins, R. (2008). Getting ahead or losing ground: Economic
mobility in America. Economic Mobility Project, Pew Charitable Trusts. Retrieved
from http://www.brookings.edu/∼/media/research/ﬁles/reports/2008/2
/economic%20mobility%20sawhill/02_economic_mobility_sawhill.pdf
Jordan, N. C., & Levine, S. C. (2009). Socioeconomic variation, number competence,
and mathematics learning difﬁculties in young children. Developmental Disabilities
Research Reviews, 15(1), 60–68. doi:10.1002/ddrr.46
Juntunen, C. L., & Bailey, T.-K. M. (in press). Training and employment services for
adult workers. In D. Blustein (Ed.), Handbook of the psychology of working.
Juntunen, C. L., Cavett, A. M., Clow, R. B., Rempel, V., Darrow, R. E., & Guilmino,
A. (2006). Social justice through self-sufﬁciency: Vocational psychology and the
transition from welfare to work. In R. L. Toporek, L. H. Gerstein, N. A. Foud,
G. Roysircar, & T. Israel (Eds.), Handbook for social justice in counseling psychology
(pp. 294–309). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Juntunen, C. L., & Wettersten, K. B. (2006). Work hope: Development and initial validation of a measure. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 94–106. doi:10.1037/00220167.53.1.94
Kenny, M. E., Walsh-Blair, L. Y., Blustein, D. L., Bempechat, J., & Seltzer, J. (2010).
Achievement motivation among urban adolescents: Work hope, autonomy support, and achievement-related beliefs. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 77(2), 205–212.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2010.02.005
Krumboltz, J. D. (1979). A social learning theory of career decision making. In A. M.
Mitchell, G. B. Jones, & J. D. Krumboltz (Eds.), Social learning and career decision
making (pp. 19–49). Cranston, RI: Carroll.
Krumboltz, J. D. (2009). The happenstance learning theory. Journal of Career Assessment, 17, 135–154.
Lapour, A., & Heppner, M. J. (2009). Social class privilege and adolescent women’s
perceived career options. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(4), 477–494. doi:
10.1037/a0017268
Lehmann, W. (2004). ‘‘For some reason, I get a little scared’’: Structure, agency, and
risk in school-work transitions. Journal of Youth Studies, 7(4), 379–396. doi:10.1080
/1367626042000315185
Lent, R., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory
of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal Of Vocational
Behavior, 45(1), 79–122. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1994.1027

272

Career Development and Counseling

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers
to career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
36–49.
Liu, W. M. (2011). Social class and classism in the helping professions: Research, theory
and practice. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Liu, W., & Ali, S. (2008). Social class and classism: Understanding the psychological
impact of poverty and inequality. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of
counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 159–175). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Liu, W. M., Ali, S. R., Soleck, G., Hopps, J., Dunston, K., & Pickett, T., Jr,. (2004). Using
social class in counseling psychology research. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
51(1), 3–18. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.51.1.32003-11100-001
Liu, W. M., Soleck, G., Hopps, J., Dunston, K., & Pickett, T. (2004). A new framework
to understand social class in counseling: The social class worldview and modern
classism theory. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 32, 95–122.
doi:2004-13339-003
Lott, B. (2002). Cognitive and behavioral distancing from the poor. American Psychologist, 57, 100–110. doi:1189955310.1037/0003-066X.57.2.1002002-10716-002
Lott, B., & Bullock, H. E. (2007). Psychology and economic injustice: Personal, professional,
and political intersections. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/11501-000
MacKay, W. R., & Miller, C. A. (1982). Relations of socioeconomic status and sex
variables to the complexity of worker functions in the occupational choices of elementary school children. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 20(1), 31–39. doi:10.1016/
0001-8791(82)90061-6
Mortimer, J. T. (2003). Working and growing up in America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Nauta, M. M. (2010). The development, evolution, and status of Holland’s theory of vocational personalities: Reﬂections and future directions for counseling psychology. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57(1), 11–22. doi:10.1037
/a0018213
Oliver, M., & Shapiro, T. (2006). Black wealth/White wealth: A new perspective on racial
inequality. New York, NY: Routledge.
Savickas, M. L. (2005). The theory and practice of career construction. In S. D. Brown,
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 42–70). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schoon, I., Parsons, S., & Sacker, A. (2004). Socioeconomic adversity, educational,
resilience, and subsequent levels of adult adaptation. Journal of Adolescent Research,
19, 383–404.
Scott, J. (2006). Job satisfaction among TANF leavers. Journal of Sociology and Social
Welfare, 33(3), 127–149.
Shapiro, T. M., Meschede, T., & Sullivan, L. (2010). The racial wealth gap increases
fourfold. (Research and Policy Brief). Waltham, MA: Institute on Assets and
Social Policy. Retrieved from http://iasp.brandeis.edu/pdfs/Racial-Wealth-Gap
-Brief.pdf

Social Class, Poverty, and Career Development

273

Shipler, D. K. (2005). The working poor: Invisible in America. New York, NY: Vintage.
Sloan, T. (2005). Global work-related suffering as a priority for vocational psychology: Comment. Counseling Psychologist, 33(2), 207–214. doi:10.1177/001100
0004272721
Smith, L. (2005). Psychotherapy, classism, and the poor: Conspicuous by their
absence. American Psychologist, 60, 687–697. doi:2005-11834-00210.1037/0003-066X
.60.7.687
Smith, L. (2010). Psychology, poverty, and the end of social exclusion: Putting our practice
to work. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Smith, L., & Mao, S. (2012). Social class and psychology. In N. A. Fouad, J. A. Carter,
& L. M. Subich (Eds.) , APA handbook of counseling psychology, vol. 1: Theories,
research, and methods (pp. 523–540). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/13754-020
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test
performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
65(5), 797–811.
Sum, A., & Khatiwada, I. (2010). Labour underutilization problems of U.S. workers across
household income groups at the end of the Great Recession: A truly Great Depression
among the nation’s low income workers amidst full employment among the most afﬂuent.
Paper prepared for the C. S. Mott Foundation, February 2010.
Super, D. E. (1990). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. In
D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development: Applying
contemporary theories to practice (2nd ed., pp. 197–261). San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development
(pp. 121–178). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Thompson, M. N., & Subich, L. M. (2006). The relation of social status to the
career decision-making process. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69, 289–301
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2006.04.008.
Thompson, M. N., & Subich, L. M. (2011). Social status identity: Antecedents
and vocational outcomes. Counseling Psychologist, 39(5), 735–763. doi:10.1177
/0011000010389828
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011a). A proﬁle of the
working poor, 2009. Report 1027. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps
/cpswp2009.pdf
Vondracek, F. W., & Lerner, R. M. (1982). Vocational role development in adolescence. In B. B. Wolman (Ed.), Handbook of developmental psychology (pp. 602–614).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vondracek, F. W., Lerner, R. M., & Schulenberg, J. E. (1983). The concept of
development in vocational theory and intervention. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
23, 179–202.
Vondracek, F. W., Lerner, R. M., & Schulenberg, J. E. (1986). Career development A
life-span developmental perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

274

Career Development and Counseling

Vuolo, M., Staff, J., & Mortimer, J. T. (2011). Weathering the great recession:
Psychological and behavioral trajectories in the transition from school to work.
Developmental Psychology. Advance Online Publication. doi:10.1037/a0026047
Watts, R., Grifﬁth, D., & Abdul-Adil, J. (1999). Sociopolitical development as an antidote for oppression: Theory and action. American Journal of Community Psychology,
27, 255–272.
Wilson, W. J. (1996). When work disappears: The world of the new urban poor. New York,
NY: Knopf.
Yakushko, O., & Sokolova, O. (2010). Work hope and inﬂuences of the career
development among Ukrainian college students. Journal of Career Development,
36(4), 310–323. doi:10.1177/0894845309345670
Young, R. A. (1983). Career development of adolescents: An ecological perspective.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 12(5), 401–417. doi:10.1007/BF02088723

C H A P T E R 10

Career Development of Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender
Individuals
JEFFREY P. PRINCE

T

HE CAREER LITERATURE PERTAINING to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender

(LGBT) individuals has grown dramatically in recent years (Chung,
Williams, & Dispenza, 2009). The ﬁrst conceptual and practical articles emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Elliott, 1993; Hetherington,
Hillerbrand, & Etringer, 1989), and increasingly sophisticated, empirical
investigations began to follow within a decade (Bieschke & Matthews,
1996; Chung, 2001). Today, lesbian and gay issues appear increasingly in
the counseling literature (Croteau, Bieschke, Fassinger, & Manning, 2008),
and scholarly efforts in this domain represent one of the most signiﬁcant
recent advances in vocational psychology (Chung, in press). Nevertheless, the literature focusing on the array of theoretical and practical career
issues encountered by the diversity of LGBT populations remains limited. There is no literature speciﬁcally relating to the career development
or career counseling of bisexual individuals, and very little devoted to
that of transgender populations. Consequently, although many scholarly
works, including this one, contain the term LGBT in their titles, the content of most has been focused primarily on lesbian and gay concerns, with
limited attention to career issues speciﬁc to bisexual and transgender individuals (O’Neil, McWhirter, & Cerezo, 2008; Phillips, Ingram, Smith, &
Mindes, 2003).
This chapter highlights ﬁndings from the range of scholarly contributions
that have informed our understanding and practice of career development
and career counseling with LGBT individuals. First, major vocational theories
275

276

Career Development and Counseling

are evaluated for their applicability to sexual minority populations; this is
followed by a discussion of additional issues unique to the career development and career counseling of LGBT individuals. The intention of this
chapter is to bring together theoretical and empirical work with practical
recommendations to enable career professionals to work more effectively
with sexual minority clients.
Before turning to the literature in this domain, it might be helpful to
clarify terminology. Sexual orientation and sexual identity are terms that
are frequently used when discussing LGBT individuals; these terms are not
interchangeable. Simply put, sexual orientation refers to a person’s attraction
(emotional, sexual, spiritual) toward an individual of the same or opposite
sex (Pepper & Lorah, 2008). Sexual orientations can be described along
a continuum of multiple dimensions of behaviors and preferences rather
than as ﬁtting into four limiting categories of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
heterosexual (Chung & Katayama, 1996). Fully deﬁning sexual orientation is
beyond the scope of this chapter, and there does not appear to be consensus
on its deﬁnition in the literature (Chung, in press).
Sexual identity, by contrast, refers to the way in which a person identiﬁes
and represents herself or himself in a social context in reference to her
or his sexual orientation (e.g., identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, queer,
questioning, or heterosexual). Identities are ﬂuid and socially constructed,
according to most models. For example, most people have some degree
of bisexuality in terms of sexual orientation, yet those who identify as
bisexual comprise distinct subgroups and may differ in signiﬁcant ways
from those who identify as lesbian and gay (Worthington & Reynolds, 2009).
For simplicity, the term LGB will be used in this chapter to represent the
range of sexual identities that are typically referenced in the career literature
because most studies have used these categories rather than more complex
terms.
Both sexual orientation and sexual identity are separate from gender
identity, which refers to a person’s internal identiﬁcation as male or female.
An individual’s gender identity may or may not be the person’s assigned
biological sex at birth. Transgender is an inclusive term that applies to a
range of people who do not conform to a male–female dichotomy (Law,
Martinez, Ruggs, Hebl, & Akers, 2011). Transgender populations also include
individuals with a range of sexual orientations. The developmental and
career concerns speciﬁc to transgender individuals can be quite different
from those speciﬁc to LGB individuals; at the same time, LGBT populations as
a group have a number of career experiences in common due to their shared
sexual minority status in a heterosexually dominant culture. Consequently,
this chapter uses the terms LGB or LGBT, depending on the groups being
referenced, and includes a section that reviews the limited but growing

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

277

vocational literature that speaks directly to transgender career development
and counseling.
Deﬁnitions aside, all LGBT individuals share experiences of stigma and
marginalization that impact their career development in a variety of ways.
At the same time, LGBT individuals develop strengths and experiences that
enhance career development as a result of going through life with sexual
minority status. The important question is, what factors have emerged in the
literature to help us understand and work more effectively to promote the
career development of LGBT individuals?
CAREER THEORIES
Over the past 20 years, scholarly contributions that apply theories of vocational psychology to LGBT populations have steadily increased. This section
draws attention to these writings, evaluates the relevance and usefulness of a
number of current theories, and clusters this work into three theoretical categories: person–environment ﬁt, developmental, and social learning/social
cognitive theories. The extent of this literature remains limited, however,
and signiﬁcant future research in this domain is needed to fully evaluate the
validity of using any extant career theory with sexual minority populations.
Person–Environment Fit Theories
The earliest publication to examine a theory of person–environment (P-E)
ﬁt for its relevance to sexual minority populations was an empirical study
by Chung and Harmon (1994). This investigation was stimulated by the
earlier work of C. Hetherington (1991), who proposed that inﬂuences on the
career decision making of lesbians and gay men may be quite different than
those for heterosexuals. Chung and Harmon used Holland’s The Self-Directed
Search (Holland, 1985) to evaluate how an individual’s sexual orientation
might impact measured interest patterns. They compared the interests of
gay men with heterosexual men for each of Holland’s six types and found
that gay men demonstrated lower Realistic and Investigative interests and
higher Artistic and Social interests. Their study highlighted the importance
for counselors to consider the career aspirations and interest patterns of
gay men, not only with respect to measured interests but also relative to
environmental forces, such as stereotyping and homophobia, that inﬂuence
expressed career goals and choices.
Another early contribution by Mobley and Slaney (1996) challenged
the adequacy of Holland’s theoretical assumptions (Holland, 1997; Nauta,
Chapter 3, this volume) in accounting for the career behaviors of lesbians
and gay men. They suggested expanding the working assumptions and

278

Career Development and Counseling

principles of Holland’s theory with Cass’s (1979) model of lesbian and
gay identity development to incorporate the dual, developmental identity
challenges faced by lesbian and gay individuals, that is, the development
of both a career identity and a sexual minority identity. They described
how vocational measures that assess Holland’s constructs are inﬂuenced
not only by the level of one’s career identity but also by the stage of one’s
sexual identity. For example, they postulated that younger lesbian and gay
individuals may experience greater career indecision and lack of clarity in
their career interests and values because of the simultaneous challenge of
recognizing and integrating a minority sexual identity. Furthermore, they
suggested that assessing Holland’s construct of congruence for lesbian and
gay clients, compared to heterosexual clients, requires counselors to address
not only the role of vocational interests but also the signiﬁcant inﬂuence
of workplace climate (i.e., discrimination or support based on one’s sexual
minority status).
Early contributions such as these laid the groundwork for more sophisticated empirical investigations into the environmental and personal factors
speciﬁc to LGBT populations that inﬂuence P-E ﬁt. In fact, more recent work
(Lyons, Brenner, & Fassinger, 2005; Lyons & O’Brien, 2006) indicates that
theories of P-E ﬁt may better account for the career behaviors and workplace
experiences of sexual minority and other marginalized populations than
of nonmarginalized populations. In particular, the variable of workplace
environment (whether discriminatory or supportive) appears to be a critical
factor in assessing ﬁt. Croteau (1996), for example, reviewed studies showing
that up to 66% of LGB employees experience workplace discrimination.
An individual’s decision to identify as LGBT in the workplace and the
environmental response to this decision highlight important aspects of workplace characteristics. Disclosure—being out to their supervisors, colleagues,
and clients—may result in increased physical and mental health (Croteau,
Bieschke, et al., 2008; Waldo, 1999). At the same time, disclosure comes
with the risks of overt and covert prejudice and homophobia, such as limited job advancement and stigmatization (Croteau, Anderson, Distefano, &
Kampa-Kokesch, 2000).
Waldo (1999) developed a measure of workplace heterosexist experiences
to assess the impact of two forms of heterosexism: direct (e.g., antigay jokes)
and indirect (e.g., assumptions of heterosexuality). He found that being out
in the workplace was positively related to experiencing direct heterosexism
and that heterosexism overall was associated with adverse psychological
well-being, health, job satisfaction, and other job-related outcomes. Similarly, Ragins, Singh, and Cornwell (2007) found that those individuals who
reported greater fear of negative consequences of disclosure received fewer
promotions and reported more stress-related symptoms than those who

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

279

reported less fear. These ﬁndings highlight the importance of assessing contextual factors in the workplace. Interestingly, they are in contrast to the
view that disclosure is uniformly a positive step for LGBT individuals; concealment actually may be a necessary and adaptive decision for individuals
in hostile environments.
The theory of work adjustment (TWA; Dawis & Lofquist, 1984), a classic PE ﬁt theory, has been widely researched in relation to career choice and work
adjustment (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume). The basic
tenets of the theory hold that P-E ﬁt (in terms of person values–environment
reinforcers and person abilities–environment ability requirements) inﬂuences work adjustment. Although TWA was not designed to explain LGBT
career development, researchers have extended it to this context. The line
of reasoning has been that group-speciﬁc cultural variables, such as those
relevant to LGBT populations, inﬂuence P-E ﬁt, which, in turn, inﬂuences job
satisfaction, performance, and tenure. For example, workplace contextual
variables related to LGBT status could be expected to produce different
work experiences (e.g., encountering heterosexism versus LGBT supportive climates); such experiences could lead to individuals being more or
less in correspondence with their environments and more or less satisﬁed with their jobs. Thus, when counseling LGBT clients on job/career
choice and adjustment, a TWA approach might focus both on traditional
(value, ability) ﬁt dimensions and on the workplace climate speciﬁcally
for LGBT workers. Counselors then can help clients identify aspects of
work environments that are afﬁrming or harmful to clients’ job functioning
and well-being.
Research evaluating the usefulness of this theory with LGBT individuals, however, has only begun. Some authors have predicted that P-E ﬁt
would play a minimal role in inﬂuencing workplace satisfaction and tenure
of marginalized populations because of signiﬁcant structural barriers to
job opportunities and choices (Fassinger, 2001). In other words, because
marginalized individuals have limited access to the full array of employment options, they may not leave a job that is a bad ﬁt for them due to
their limited alternatives. However, recent research evaluating TWA with
marginalized populations has demonstrated the opposite (Lyons et al., 2005;
Lyons & O’Brien, 2006). Lyons and colleagues (2005), for example, found
that the importance of P-E ﬁt for LGB workers was not overshadowed by
discrimination. Instead, LGB workers’ perceptions of P-E ﬁt took on greater
signiﬁcance, compared to workers in general. They found that almost half
of the variance in LGB employees’ job satisfaction was attributable to how
well they perceived ﬁtting their current work environment. The authors
suggested that P-E ﬁt may take on greater importance because the nature
of LGB employees’ stigmatized status may lead them to be more highly

280

Career Development and Counseling

attuned to the culture of their work environments when making workplace
decisions.
Developmental Theories
Developmental theories have historically viewed career development as
occurring within a broader social context in which a person’s vocational
identity and self-concept develop over time as an individual interacts with
the environment (Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume; Savickas, Chapter 6, this
volume; Super, 1990; Tiedeman & O’Hara, 1963). For LGBT individuals,
the development of a vocational identity co-occurs with the development
of a sexual identity, and both of these processes take place within a larger
environmental context that is pervasively heterosexist and homophobic.
Consequently, from a developmental perspective, an LGBT individual’s
implementation of a vocational self-concept should be greatly inﬂuenced by
her or his awareness and integration of sexual identity and by the levels
of social acceptance and discrimination present in his or her social and
occupational environment.
Dunkle (1996) contributed an early publication that examined the use
of Super’s (1990) career development theory with LGB individuals. He
hypothesized that the sexual identity development of LGB individuals has
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on their career development. He outlined Super’s
stages of career development, along with the career implications for gay
and lesbian individuals at each stage. For example, he hypothesized that
gay and lesbian adolescents and young adults in Super’s exploration stage
might be managing early stages of sexual identity confusion at the same
time and, consequently, experiencing high levels of psychological distress.
This, in turn, might interfere with achieving vocational maturity. As another
example, men and women who begin the coming out process in their 30s
and 40s face the challenge of managing their sexual identity during Super’s
establishment stage. During this stage, individuals typically develop greater
stability, commitment, and mastery of their careers. However, individuals
who come out later in life, during the establishment stage, are confronted with
the challenge of managing their sexual identity on the job. This might lead
to changing careers and recycling (reexploring both self and environments)
to ﬁnd a different career that allows fuller expression of one’s identity.
Other authors (Belz, 1993; C. Hetherington, 1991; Prince, 1995) have also
described how the coming-out process can disrupt the typical course of career
development. For example, C. Hetherington (1991) hypothesized a bottleneck
effect wherein LGB individuals in the early stages of coming out might
approach career developmental tasks at a slower pace because of the need to
deal with competing demands associated with sexual identity development.

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

281

Similarly, Gonsiorek (1988) and colleagues (Gonsiorek & Rudolph, 1991)
proposed that many gay and lesbian adolescents develop a ‘‘false identity’’
based on the lack of nurturing support from peers and others for all aspects
of their identity, instead of a true identity based on trust in their own
self-evaluations of their needs, values, and interests.
Gottfredson’s (2005) developmental theory of circumscription and compromise is another useful theory that might be applied to understanding
how LGB individuals develop career aspirations—in particular, how these
aspirations may be shaped by perceptions of obstacles, such as discrimination and heterosexism. Croteau and colleagues (2000), for example, proposed
that gender role socialization inﬂuences the career development and occupational aspirations of gay and lesbian children differently than heterosexual
children. They suggested that gay and lesbian children may internalize
vocational stereotypes about gay men and lesbians that, in turn, constrict
their perceptions about appropriate career options. Schneider and Dimito (2010) provided some empirical support for this assertion. They found
that individuals who had experienced the highest level of anti-LGBT discrimination reported less satisfaction with their career choices, and they
perceived fewer work options. They found that gay men and visible minorities were especially likely to be negatively affected by prior discrimination.
Interestingly, they also found that lesbians were more likely than gay men
to report that their sexual orientation was a positive force in opening
up academic and career possibilities for them. The authors hypothesized
that coming out as a lesbian may remove restrictive social expectations
around gender, thereby freeing lesbian women to consider less traditional
career paths.
A number of investigations have identiﬁed social support as an important
contextual variable that positively contributes to both sexual identity and
career development of LGB individuals (Jordan & Deluty, 1998; Nauta et al.,
2001; Schmidt & Nilsson, 2006). In particular, these studies have found
family and community support to be especially useful career development
resources for LGB persons (Boatwright, Gilbert, Forrest, & Ketzenberger,
1996; Tomlinson & Fassinger, 2003). For example, in a study of college
students, Schmidt, Miles, and Welsh (2011) found that social support served
as a buffer against the negative impact of perceived discrimination on
vocational decision making and college adjustment. They recommended
that career counselors of college students focus on their clients’ support
network as a central consideration in counseling.
Over the past decade, a number of scholars have advanced our understanding of the complexity of sexual identity development (Chung, in press;
D’Augelli, 2006; Rosario, Schrimshaw, & Hunter, 2004). They have stressed
the importance of cultural differences in the formation of an LGB identity.

282

Career Development and Counseling

They have also questioned a basic assumption of earlier sexual identity models: that achieving an integrated and healthy identity is dependent on coming
out socially and in the workplace. Fukuyama and Ferguson (2000) stressed
that this is particularly pertinent for LGB individuals who are from cultures
in which homosexuality is especially stigmatized. Clients from underrepresented populations, they argue, delicately balance multiple identities when
evaluating when and if to come out and to whom. For example, LGB people
of color may choose different levels of disclosure to family members, friends,
or colleagues to maintain harmony across a range of communities.
Similarly, there is an increasing trend among younger LGBT individuals to
avoid labeling themselves in any setting because of the potential stigmatization and oversimpliﬁcation such labels place on deﬁnitions of sexual identity
(Diamond, 2003). Fassinger and Arseneau (2007) expanded on this more
complex conceptualization by drawing attention to the myriad betweengroup and within-group differences that exist among LGBT populations. For
example, there are important between-group differences in experiences that
shape the work trajectories of these four sexual minority groups. In addition, these inﬂuences are ﬁltered through within-group differences, such as
class, race, and age. Furthermore, individual characteristics, such as personality, add an inﬂuence that is unique to each person. Fassinger and Arseneau
(2007) suggest that counselors attend to all of these differences to avoid
oversimpliﬁcation and to sharpen the focus of counseling. More empirical
work is clearly needed to support and reﬁne current models of sexual identity development and to provide clearer guidance on the complex reciprocal
inﬂuences of career and sexual identity development.
Social Learning Theories
Several authors have advocated applying the constructs of Krumboltz’s
(1979) social learning theory of career decision making and social cognitive
career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994) to LGB populations
(Datti, 2009; Fassinger, 1996; Morrow, Gore, & Campbell, 1996). Datti (2009),
for example, presented a detailed map for using Krumboltz’s theory to
conceptualize the unique career-related challenges of LGBT individuals.
Krumboltz outlined four factors that inﬂuence individuals’ career decisions: genetics, environmental conditions, learning experiences, and task
approach skills. Datti emphasized that many of the environmental conditions and events that Krumboltz described as common contextual factors
for heterosexual individuals may more intensely impact LGBT individuals.
For example, geographic location and political climate affect all people,
but these environmental conditions are particularly inﬂuential factors for
sexual minority individuals. Federal, state, and local laws in the United

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

283

States and most other countries deny LGBT individuals fundamental human
rights such as job protection, health insurance, pensions, and marriage
licenses. Furthermore, protections from workplace discrimination in hiring
and promotion on the basis of sexual or gender orientation are lacking
in most work environments. He recommended that counselors help LGB
clients weigh these factors when making decisions about employers and
job location.
Several authors have emphasized that SCCT is a particularly useful theory
for understanding the process of career development and decision making
for individuals from marginalized groups who encounter workplace and
societal discrimination (Byars & Hackett, 1998; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 2000).
Morrow and colleagues (1996) were among the ﬁrst to demonstrate the value
of applying SCCT to the career development of lesbian women and gay men.
They described how societal inﬂuences such as stereotyping, nonsupport for
emerging interests, and peer pressure can shape and truncate the range of
academic and career interests of lesbian and gay individuals by inﬂuencing
their self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations. They also stressed how barriers
such as prejudice and discrimination based on sexual orientation impede
the translation of interests into academic and career goals and choices. They
suggested, for example, that lesbian women and gay men, when anticipating
oppression or discrimination in a particular domain, are less likely to develop
an enduring interest in that domain, despite having high self-efﬁcacy. To put
it simply, they wrote: ‘‘The crucial issue may not be, ‘Can I do it?’ but ‘What
will happen if I do?’’’ (p. 141).
More recently, scholars have used the constructs of SCCT to describe how
LGB workers choose sexual identity management strategies (Chung 2001;
Chung, Williams, & Dispenza, 2009; Lidderdale, Croteau, Anderson, TovarMurray, & Davis, 2007). Sexual identity management refers to whether and
how LGB individuals disclose their sexual identity at work. Chung (2001)
developed a model of sexual identity management based on an earlier model
that outlined strategies that LGB persons might use, depending on the level
of risk and potential consequences of a workplace situation (Griffen, 1992).
Chung’s ﬁve strategies, ranging along a continuum from most discreet to
most transparent, include (1) acting (engaging in a heterosexual relationship
to appear heterosexual), (2) passing (fabricating information to give the
impression of being heterosexual), (3) covering (censuring information that
would reveal an LGB identity, (4) implicitly out (behaving honestly without
labeling oneself as LGB), and (5) explicitly out (openly stating that one
is LGB).
Lidderdale and colleagues (2007) proposed using SCCT as a framework
for understanding how LGB individuals learn about and choose among
such approaches for managing identity in the workplace. Their model

284

Career Development and Counseling

describes how socially learned self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations
interact with workplace contextual factors to determine which sexual identity
management strategy an individual will choose to use at any particular
time. For example, an individual would likely develop strong, positive selfefﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations regarding being out if he or she has
a history of exposure to the value of diversity and to LGB role models who
manage their identities openly. This individual would then be more likely to
choose identity management strategies that are open. Conversely, adverse
learning experiences about being out may produce weaker self-efﬁcacy
beliefs and strong negative outcome expectations (e.g., anticipated ridicule
or discrimination), prompting choice of more cautious identity management
strategies.
Models of sexual identity management draw attention to the prevalence of
various forms of formal and informal workplace discrimination and provide
an understanding of the ways in which LGB individuals may cope with them.
These models stress the ongoing daily choices that LGB individuals make
to reveal or conceal sexual identity in response to potential discrimination
in the workplace. They take into account the individual’s other social and
cultural identities and stress the variability of individual and cultural needs.
They do not assume or promote one coping strategy as more desirable
than another. Instead, they encourage exploration of the risks and beneﬁts
of various coping strategies that correspond with a particular individual’s
identity development and needs; they focus on the unique psychological
processes and learning experiences of the individual. For example, choosing
to be out in the workplace is not always an optimal choice (Chen-Hayes,
2005); workers from cultures that are more group than individually focused
and workers struggling with poverty may be less likely to experience high
self-efﬁcacy or to anticipate positive outcomes from being out at work
(Croteau, Anderson, & VanderWal, 2008).
An emerging body of literature has expanded the study of sexual identity management and workplace discrimination to the experiences and
challenges facing LGBT individuals in leadership positions (Fassinger, Shullman, & Stevenson, 2010; Goodman, Schell, Alexander, & Eidelman, 2008).
Fassinger and colleagues (2010), for example, proposed an innovative multidimensional model of LGBT leadership that addresses the interaction of
identity disclosure, gender conformity, and workplace contextual factors.
This model emphasizes the strengths that LGBT leaders often bring to organizations, such as tolerance of ambiguity, sensitivity to diverse employees,
understanding of oppression, creativity, and willingness to take risks. At the
same time, they point out how easily a hostile workplace climate can result
from negative stereotypes or derogatory comments about LGB leaders from
coworkers.

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

285

Lehavot and Lambert (2007), for example, found that participants rated
lesbian and gay leaders most negatively when they behaved in ways that
conﬁrmed sexual identity stereotypes (gay men acting feminine, lesbians
behaving in masculine ways). Thus, lesbian and gay leaders may be at
greater risk for negative perceptions by followers when they behave in ways
considered inappropriate for their gender. Research with lesbian and gay
leaders has focused on individuals who are out in the workplace. It is quite
reasonable to assume, however, that many LGBT individuals who choose not
to disclose their sexual identity at work also may avoid taking on leadership
roles due to the risk and scrutiny that that such visibility brings. Research
on the leadership career paths of LGBT workers, whether out or not, is an
exciting new area of the career development literature.
USING CAREER ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Although the literature addressing career development and counseling of
LGB persons has grown signiﬁcantly, few publications have focused on
using career assessment tools with LGB individuals. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development (Hansen, 1997) devoted a special issue
to the topic of heterosexism and homophobia in psychological assessment,
and the Journal of Career Assessment has published two articles on LGB career
assessment (Chung, 2003b; Prince, 1997b). Several book chapters also have
incorporated case studies and practical guidelines for using career assessments with sexual minority clients (Pope, 1992; Pope, Prince, & Mitchell,
2000; Prince & Potoczniak, 2012). Otherwise, this topic has largely been
ignored. It is also noteworthy that the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (American Educational Research Association, American
Psychological Association, & National Council on Measurement in Education, 1999) address other dimensions of diversity but are silent on the
development and use of tests with LGBT persons. Nevertheless, as research
has shown with members of other socially oppressed groups, career assessments with questionable validity for LGB populations can be misleading
and even harmful when inappropriately used (Walsh & Betz, 1995).
Sound career assessment requires assessment skills that are rooted in the
counselor’s self-awareness and knowledge of the psychological, cultural,
and environmental concerns that are speciﬁc to LGB individuals (Chung,
2003b; Prince, 1997b). For example, Chung (2003b) emphasized the need for
counselors to consider how their worldview, particularly their attitudes and
possible biases regarding homosexuality and bisexuality, might inﬂuence
their selection and use of assessments. For example, a counselor with
biased attitudes toward LGB individuals might use assessment results to
inappropriately direct some LGB clients to more gender-traditional careers

286

Career Development and Counseling

by discounting scores on scales that are counter to gender expectations. He
pointed out the need for counselors to increase their knowledge in a number
of domains, such as sexual identity development, workplace discrimination,
LGB relationships, and diversity within the LGB community, and to seek
out consultation when needed.
Furthermore, it is critical to evaluate each potential assessment tool for
bias before using it with LGBT clients. Widely used career assessment instruments do not include item content relevant to the speciﬁc career development
experiences of LGB populations, and they have not been designed to assess
theoretical constructs that speak to LGB career concerns (Prince, 1997a,
1997b). Effective assessment therefore requires counselors to use supplemental strategies to address inﬂuences such as sexual identity development,
identity management, workplace discrimination, and heterosexism. Regrettably, effectively adapting the assessment process to meet LGB client needs
is not always easy to do, given that clients’ sexual identity status is often
invisible. Counselors need to routinely assume at ﬁrst that all clients may be
lesbian, gay, or bisexual. Furthermore, counselors need to consider routinely
collecting intake information from clients regarding their sexual identity so
that relevant historical material (such as experiences with discrimination
and stigma) can be explored and integrated into the assessment process.
Although some counselors may ﬁnd it awkward to raise the question of
sexual identity status in the ﬁrst interview, it is nevertheless important to
gather this information. It is good practice, for example, to include an item
relating to sexual identity on written intake forms that clients complete prior
to the ﬁrst interview. These forms routinely collect other demographic and
historical information, such as gender, ethnicity, and education, that allow
the counselor to form ﬁrst impressions and guide the ﬁrst interview. The
absence of an item on sexual identity reinforces the invisibility of sexual
minorities; by omission, the form can relay the message that heterosexuality
is assumed.
TRANSGENDER INDIVIDUALS
The literature addressing the work and career concerns of transgender
individuals has increased over the past few years, helping to inform both
researchers and practitioners. Nevertheless, scholarly contributions continue
to rely heavily on extrapolations from ﬁndings with lesbian and gay populations and to use informal sources of information such as websites of
transgender organizations (Brown & Rounsley, 1996; O’Neil et al., 2008).
Pepper and Lorah (2008) were among the ﬁrst to summarize common career
and workplace issues faced by transgender individuals and to provide
recommendations for career counselors. They emphasized the numerous

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

287

and signiﬁcant workplace challenges that transgender individuals confront,
such as deciding whether to transition (i.e., begin dressing, behaving, or
living as the new gender) in their current job and choosing how to deal
with coworkers’ prejudice and discrimination. Additional challenges include
managing social isolation at work and facing high rates of underemployment
(Schilt, 2006).
There has been growing recognition of the different work experiences
speciﬁc to persons within the larger transgender category. For example, some
of the workplace experiences and prejudices faced by male-to-female (MTF)
transgender persons differ from those of female-to-male (FTM) transgender
persons because of gender role expectations. MTF persons may confront the
loss of societal and workplace privileges of living as a man, whereas FTM
persons may encounter very different experiences and conﬂicts (Pepper &
Lorah, 2008). It is not surprising, therefore, that research ﬁndings indicate
that workplace conﬂicts are a primary reason for transgender individuals to
seek counseling (Rachlin, 2002).
Only recently have researchers begun to gather data to support previous
theoretical work in this area. Budge, Tebbe, and Howard (2010) used a
qualitative case study approach to better understand the career decisionmaking processes and workplace experiences of transgender people. They
identiﬁed a number of themes across their interviews that described the
transition process at work, such as: preparing for the transition, coming out
at work, appearance at work, coworker reactions, and coping experiences
at work. They also identiﬁed a number of themes related to individuals’
career decision making, such as occupational barriers and occupational
opportunities. For example, all participants described barriers that related
to prejudice and discrimination. They included overt discrimination, job
loss due to gender identity, bathroom discrimination, and needing to work
harder to compensate for transgender status. Occupational opportunities for
a number of participants included the discovery of interests in teaching and
social justice as a result of helping coworkers understand transgender issues.
Similarly, Law and colleagues (2011) examined individual experiences
and organizational characteristics to understand the work experiences of
transgender individuals. They found less stigmatization toward women
transitioning to men than toward men transitioning to women. They also
found that coworkers and organizational support played essential roles in
inﬂuencing the experiences of transgender individuals. Speciﬁcally, their
results indicated that individuals had greater job satisfaction and organizational commitment when they had supportive coworkers who reacted
positively to their workplace disclosure. In addition, they found that participants were more likely to disclose at work if there were individuals outside
of work to whom they could disclose their identity.

288

Career Development and Counseling

These studies highlight a number of factors that can inform career
counselors working with transgender clients, particularly those who are
considering whether to disclose their gender identity. Career counselors
need to engage in realistic yet sensitive conversations with transgender
clients about prejudice and discrimination and focus on helping them to
build strong support networks. Counselors also need to obtain training or
supervision to learn more about the legal and medical issues that inﬂuence
the lives of transgender people. Finally, the growing literature in this area
emphasizes the important role of workplace environment and the need for
career professionals to advocate for strengthening laws and policies that
support the recruitment and retention of qualiﬁed transgender workers.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
The foundations of counselor competence with LGB clients are in many
ways similar to those that are recommended for other nonmajority clients
who endure stereotyping and stigmatization (Israel & Selvedge, 2003). For
example, the multicultural counseling literature emphasizes the need for
counselors to examine the stereotypes and biases they hold about various
ethnic groups and to acquire knowledge about the acculturation, worldview,
and identity development of their clients (Sue, Arredondo, & McDavis, 1992).
Competent career counseling with LGB clients requires these same efforts.
In addition, there are factors unique to working with LGB populations that
need to be incorporated. For instance, addressing sexual orientation requires
discussing sexuality, a particularly difﬁcult topic for many people and one
that polarizes religious groups and political parties. A counselor needs to
determine for each client to what degree sexual orientation needs to become
a primary or secondary focus of counseling and to examine whose needs are
driving that decision, the counselor’s or the client’s. For example, a lesbian
college sophomore who presents with career indecision may or may not need
or want to talk about her sexual orientation. On the one hand, a counselor
needs to provide an afﬁrmative environment for exploring the inﬂuence of
sexual orientation so that the topic is not ignored due to discomfort. On
the other hand, overemphasis and an exclusive focus on sexual orientation
might lead to early termination if a client feels that her or his presenting
career needs are being discounted or deferred.
Fortunately, a number of professional practice guidelines provide counselors with a valuable framework for working effectively and responsibly
with LGB clients. ‘‘Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Lesbian, Gay
and Bisexual Clients’’ (APA, 2012), for example, integrates information in
areas such as assessment, identity, and diversity to help practitioners engage
in afﬁrmative practice. Similarly, the Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

289

and Transgender Issues in Counseling (2003) has published competencies
for counseling LGBT clients, and these have been adopted by the American
Counseling Association. These competencies assist counselors in examining
their personal biases and values regarding LGBT clients and provide guidance in applying appropriate and effective interventions. Included among
these competencies are several that are speciﬁc to career development. They
suggest that competent counselors need to pursue the following four strategies: (1) counter occupational stereotypes that restrict LGBT clients’ career
development and career decision making, (2) explore ways in which government statutes do not protect LGBT workers from discrimination, (3) help
LGBT clients make career choices that facilitate both identity formation and
job satisfaction, and (4) connect LGBT clients with sexual minority role
models who can increase awareness of viable career options.
A social justice approach offers an additional framework that is useful for
career counselors. This approach highlights the ways in which the social
and political contexts of LGBT persons’ lives (e.g., heterosexism, societal
disapproval, and deprivation of fundamental human rights) interfere with
healthy development (Meyer, 2003). The American Counseling Association’s
Advocacy Competencies (Ratts, Toporek, & Lewis, 2010) provide a detailed
framework for counselors wanting to infuse social justice work into their
counseling practice. These competencies identify ways in which counselors
can engage in both individual counseling and community-based work to
help clients achieve optimal results. Along these lines, Whitcomb and Loewy
(2006) provided speciﬁc suggestions for engaging in social justice work on
behalf of LGB people. They recommended that counselors become involved
in local and national politics and advocacy efforts to inﬂuence public opinion,
policies, and laws that are harmful to the career development of LGBT
persons.
A recurring theme throughout the scholarly literature of LGBT career
development is the need for counselors to implement an LGBT-afﬁrmative
approach to counseling—one that emphasizes the strengths and beneﬁts
of LGBT identities and that supports an individual’s ﬂourishing in all
areas of life (Rostosky & Riggle, 2011). One example is Shultheiss’s (2003)
relational approach to career counseling with sexual minority women. She
advocated that counselors focus on strengthening clients’ interpersonal
support systems and examine how partners, friends, and family can facilitate
career development and career aspirations. Connecting LGBT clients with
supportive communities is critical to combating the isolation that is typical
for LGBT individuals who grow up in families that do not share their
minority status and in cultures that are heterosexually deﬁned.
One important source of support for many LGBT clients is a romantic
partner or spouse who may play a particularly signiﬁcant role in reducing

290

Career Development and Counseling

the stress and isolation that result from workplace discrimination and
heterosexism. At the same time, integrating a same-sex relationship into
one’s work life presents unique challenges to lesbian and gay couples—an
important one being whether to come out in the workplace together. For
example, lesbian and gay couples often struggle in deciding when and if
to bring a partner to work-related social events or whether to mention a
partner when negotiating beneﬁts for a new job. O’Ryan and McFarland
(2010) identiﬁed several themes that can assist counselors with couples
trying to successfully blend their relationship and careers. They found, for
example, that it was important for couples to engage in discussions together
to plan and weigh the options of coming out in the workplace. Similarly,
they found that couples who made efforts to create lesbian- and gay-positive
social networks increased their sense of well-being and empowerment.
Another essential recommendation for career counselors is to become
knowledgeable about the speciﬁc issues that are the context of LGBT clients’
lives (e.g., sexual identity development, sexual identity management in the
workplace, the impact of stigma, heterosexism, discrimination). Counselors
need to be informed so they can work with each client to understand and
address how these factors have inﬂuenced career development and decision
making and how they may continue to do so in the future. The invisibility
of sexual identity can complicate such exploration. Bieschke and Matthews
(1996) noted, for example, that often an LGB client will choose not to disclose
sexual identity status to a counselor, particularly when a client is unsure of the
degree to which the counselor is LGB-afﬁrmative. Clients may look for clues
in the counselor’s ofﬁce or in the counselor’s words or behaviors to determine
if he or she is knowledgeable and supportive. Thus, it is incumbent on career
counselors to demonstrate LGB-supportive behaviors, such as avoiding
heterosexist language in communications with all clients, and to create
an LGB-afﬁrmative physical environment. For example, counselors might
display ofﬁce artwork or periodicals that are LGB-afﬁrmative. Similarly,
many organizations create afﬁrmative ofﬁce climates by placing decals or
signs on ofﬁce doors or in waiting rooms to indicate the ofﬁce is an LGB
‘‘safe space.’’
It is also essential for counselors to use relevant career resources to help
clients explore jobs and careers. Most traditional career resources and career
libraries do not feature LGBT-related material; this absence contributes to
the stigmatization, invisibility, and isolation of LGB individuals. Proactive efforts are required to ensure that career resources are expanded to
include occupational data, job listings, and career information from LGBpositive sources such as local and national LGBT organizations and from
employers that offer LGBT-afﬁrmative policies. For example, the Human
Rights Campaign (http://www.hrc.org), the National Gay and Lesbian

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

291

Chamber of Commerce (http://www.nglcc.org), and Out and Equal Workplace Advocates (http://www.outandequal.org) produce an array of career
resources speciﬁc to LGB populations. Using resources such as these not only
provide LGBT clients with relevant information but also ensure that career
counselors remain up-to-date on current work issues that impact the lives of
LGB clients.
Over the past 20 years, there have been important advances in understanding the unique career concerns of LGBT individuals. There have also been
important societal changes, such as increasing recognition of domestic partnerships by employers and, in some locations, the legalization of marriage
of same-sex couples. Nevertheless, LGBT individuals continue to deal with
contextual factors inherent in living and working in a heterosexual society,
and we have yet to expand or develop career theories that adequately speak
to these complexities. Still, the incredible diversity of cultural groups that
make up LGBT populations presents unlimited opportunities; both scholars
and career practitioners are in an ideal position to develop more effective
interventions, to empower LGBT individuals to thrive at school and work,
and to advocate for a more just society.
REFERENCES
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, National Council on Measurement in Education, Joint Committee on
Standards for Educational & Psychological Testing (US). (1999). Standards for educational and psychological testing. Washington, DC: American Educational Research
Association.
American Psychological Association. (2012). Guidelines for psychological practice with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. American Psychologist, 67(1), 10–42.
doi:10.1037/a0024659
Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Issues in Counseling. (2003).
Competencies for counseling gay, lesbian, and bisexual (LGB) clients. Retrieved from
http://www.algbtic.org/resources/competencies.html
Belz, J. R. (1993). Sexual orientation as a factor in career development. Career
Development Quarterly, 41(3), 197–200.
Bieschke, K. J., & Matthews, C. (1996). Career counselor attitudes and behaviors
toward gay, lesbian, and bisexual clients [Special issue: Vocational Issues of
Lesbian Women and Gay Men]. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48(2), 243–255.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0021
Boatwright, K. J., Gilbert, M. S., Forrest, L., & Ketzenberger, K. (1996). Impact of
identity development upon career trajectory: Listening to the voices of lesbian
women [Special issue: Vocational Issues of Lesbian Women and Gay Men]. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 48(2), 210–228. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0019
Bohan, J. S. (1996). Psychology and sexual orientation: Coming to terms. Florence, KY:
Taylor & Francis/Routledge.

292

Career Development and Counseling

Brown, M. L., & Rounsley, C. A. (1996). True selves: Understanding transsexualism—for
families, friends, coworkers, and helping professionals. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Budge, S. L., Tebbe, E. N., & Howard, K. A. S. (2010). The work experiences
of transgender individuals: Negotiating the transition and career decisionmaking processes. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57(4), 377–393. doi:10.1037
/a0020472
Byars, A. M., & Hackett, G. (1998). Applications of social cognitive theory to the
career development of women of color. Applied & Preventive Psychology, 7(4),
255–267. doi:10.1016/S0962-1849(98)80029-2
Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexual identity formation: A theoretical model. Journal of
Homosexuality, 4(3), 219–235.
Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2005). Challenging multiple oppressions in counselor education.
In J. M. Croteau, J. S. Lark, M. A. Lidderdale, & Y. B. Chung (Eds.), Deconstructing
heterosexism in the counseling professions: A narrative approach (pp. 53–57). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chung, Y. B. (2001). Work discrimination and coping strategies: Conceptual frameworks for counseling lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. Career Development
Quarterly, 50(1), 33–44.
Chung, Y. B. (2003a). Career counseling with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered persons: The next decade [Special issue: Career Counseling in the Next
Decade]. Career Development Quarterly, 52(1), 78–85.
Chung, Y. B. (2003b). Ethical and professional issues in career assessment with
lesbian, gay, and bisexual persons. Journal of Career Assessment, 11(1), 96–112.
doi:10.1177/106907202237462
Chung, Y. B. (in press). Sexual orientation and sexual identity: Theory, research
and practice. In APA handbook of counseling psychology. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Chung, Y. B., & Harmon, L. W. (1994). The career interests and aspirations of gay
men: How sex-role orientation is related. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 45(2),
223–239. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1994.1033
Chung, Y. B., & Katayama, M. (1996). Assessment of sexual orientation in lesbian/gay/bisexual studies. Journal of Homosexuality, 30(4), 49–62. doi:10.1300
/J082v30n04_03
Chung, Y. B., Williams, W., & Dispenza, F. (2009). Validating work discrimination
and coping strategy models for sexual minorities. Career Development Quarterly,
58(2), 162–170.
Committee on Lesbian and Gay Concerns. (1991). Avoiding heterosexual bias in
language. American Psychologist, 46(9), 973–974. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.46.9.973
Croteau, J. M. (1996). Research on the work experiences of lesbian, gay and bisexual
people: An integrative review of methodology and content. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 48, 195–209.
Croteau, J. M., Anderson, M. Z., Distefano, T. M., & Kampa-Kokesch, S. (2000).
Lesbian, gay, and bisexual vocational psychology: Reviewing foundations
and planning construction. In R. M. Perez, K. A. DeBord, & K. J. Bieschke
(Eds.), Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

293

clients (pp. 383–408).Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/10339-016
Croteau, J. M., Anderson, M. Z., & VanderWal, B. L. (2008). Models of workplace
sexual identity disclosure and management: Reviewing and extending concepts.
[Special issue: Offering New Insights into GLBT Workplace Experiences]. Group
& Organization Management, 33(5), 532–565. doi:10.1177/1059601108321828
Croteau, J. M., Bieschke, K. J., Fassinger, R. E., & Manning, J. L. (2008). Counseling
psychology and sexual orientation: History, selective trends, and future directions.
In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (pp. 194–211).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Datti, P. A. (2009). Applying social learning theory of career decision making to gay,
lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and questioning young adults. Career Development
Quarterly, 58(1), 54–64.
D’Augelli, A. R. (2006). Developmental and contextual factors and mental health
among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths. In A. M. Omoto, H. S. Kurtzman (Eds.),
Sexual orientation and mental health: Examining identity and development in lesbian,
gay, and bisexual people (pp. 37–53). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/11261-002
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment:
An individual-differences model and its applications. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Diamond, L. M. (2003). Was it a phase? Young women’s relinquishment of lesbian/bisexual identities over a 5-year period. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84(2), 352–364. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.2.352
Dunkle, J. H. (1996). Toward an integration of gay and lesbian identity development and Super’s life-span approach [Special issue: Vocational Issues of
Lesbian Women and Gay Men]. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48(2), 149–159.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0015
Elliott, J. E. (1993). Career development with lesbian and gay clients. Career Development Quarterly, 41(3), 210–226.
Fassinger, R. E. (1996). Notes from the margins: Integrating lesbian experience
into the vocational psychology of women [Special issue: Vocational Issues of
Lesbian Women and Gay Men]. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48(2), 160–175.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0016
Fassinger, R. E. (2001). Diversity at work: Research issues in vocational development.
In D. B. Pope-Davis & H. L. K. Coleman (Eds.), The intersection of race, class, and
gender in multicultural counseling (pp. 267–288). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fassinger, R. E., & Arseneau, J. R. (2007). ‘‘I’d rather get wet than be under that
umbrella’’: Differentiating the experiences and identities of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender people. In K. J. Bieschke, R. M. Perez, & K. A DeBord (Eds.),
Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients (pp.
19–49). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Fassinger, R. E., Shullman, S. L., & Stevenson, M. R. (2010). Toward an afﬁrmative lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender leadership paradigm. American Psychologist,
65(3), 201–215. doi:10.1037/a0018597

294

Career Development and Counseling

Fukuyama, M. A., & Ferguson, A. D. (2000). Lesbian, gay, and bisexual people of
color: Understanding cultural complexity and managing multiple oppressions.
In R. M. Perez, K. A. DeBord, & K. J. Bieschke (Eds.), Handbook of counseling and
psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients (pp. 81–105). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10339-004
Gonsiorek, J. C. (1988). Mental health issues of gay and lesbian adolescents. Journal
of Adolescent Health Care, 9(2), 114–122. doi:10.1016/0197-0070(88)90057-5
Gonsiorek, J. C., & Rudolph, J. R. (1991). Homosexual identity: Coming out and other
developmental events. In J. C. Gonsiorek, J. D. Weinrich, J. C. Gonsiorek, & J. D.
Weinrich (Eds.), Homosexuality: Research implications for public policy (pp. 161–176).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Goodman, J. A., Schell, J., Alexander, M. G., & Eidelman, S. (2008). The impact of a
derogatory remark on prejudice toward a gay male leader. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 38(2), 542–555.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Grifﬁn, P. (1992). From hiding out to coming out: Empowering lesbian and gay
educators. In K. M. Harbeck (Ed.), Coming out of the classroom closet: Gay and lesbian
students, teachers, and curricula (pp. 167–196). Binghamton, NY: Harrington Park
Press.
Hansen, J. C. (1997). Heterosexism and homophobia: Potential cultural biases in
assessment. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 30(2),
66–67.
Hetherington, C. (1991). Life planning and career counseling with gay and lesbian
students. In N. J. Evans & V. A. Wall (Eds.), Beyond tolerance: Gays, lesbians and
bisexuals on campus (pp. 131–146). Alexandria, VA: American College Personnel
Association.
Hetherington, C., Hillerbrand, E., & Etringer, B. D. (1989). Career counseling with
gay men: Issues and recommendations for research. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 67(8), 452–454.
Hetherington, E. M. (1991). The role of individual differences and family relationships in children’s coping with divorce and remarriage. In P. A. Cowan
& E. M. Hetherington (Eds.), Family transitions (pp. 165–194). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Holland, J. L. (1985). The self-directed search: A guide to educational and vocational
planning. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources, Inc.
Israel, T., & Selvidge, M. M. D. (2003). Contributions of multicultural counseling to counselor competence with lesbian, gay and bisexual clients. Journal of
Multicultural Counseling and Development, 31(2), 84–98.
Jordan, K. M., & Deluty, R. H. (1998). Coming out for lesbian women: Its relation to anxiety, positive affectivity, self-esteem and social support. Journal of
Homosexuality, 35(2), 41–63. doi:10.1300/J082v35n02_03

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

295

Krumboltz, J. D. (1979). A social learning theory of career decision making. In A. M.
Mitchell, G. B. Jones, & J. D. Krumboltz (Eds.), Social learning and career decision
making (pp. 19–49). Cranston, RI: Caroll.
Krumboltz, J. D., Mitchell, A. M., & Jones, G. B. (1976). A social learning
theory of career selection. Counseling Psychologist, 6(1), 71–81. doi:10.1177
/001100007600600117
Law, C. L., Martinez, L. R., Ruggs, E. N., Hebl, M. R., & Akers, E. (2011).
Trans-parency in the workplace: How the experiences of transsexual employees can be improved. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79(3), 710–723. doi:10.1016
/j.jvb.2011.03.018
Lehavot, K., & Lambert, A. J. (2007). Toward a greater understanding of antigay
prejudice: On the role of sexual orientation and gender role violation. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 29(3), 279–292.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 45(1), 79–122. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1994.1027
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers to
career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47(1),
36–49. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.47.1.36
Lidderdale, M. A., Croteau, J. M., Anderson, M. Z., Tovar-Murray, D., & Davis, J. M.
(2007). Building lesbian, gay, and bisexual vocational psychology: A theoretical
model of workplace sexual identity management. In K. J. Bieschke, R. M. Perez,
& K. A. DeBord (Eds.), Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy with lesbian,
gay, and bisexual clients (pp. 245–270). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Lyons, H. Z., Brenner, B. R., & Fassinger, R. E. (2005). A multicultural test of
the theory of work adjustment: Investigating the role of heterosexism and ﬁt
perceptions in the job satisfaction of lesbian, gay, and bisexual employees. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 52(4), 537–548. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.52.4.537
Lyons, H. Z., & O’Brien, K. M. (2006). The role of person–environment ﬁt in the
job satisfaction and tenure intentions of African American employees. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 53(4), 387–396. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.53.4.387
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay,
and bisexual populations: Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological
Bulletin, 129, 674–697.
Mobley, M., & Slaney, R. B. (1996). Holland’s theory: Its relevance for lesbian
women and gay men [Special issue: Vocational Issues of Lesbian Women and
Gay Men]. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48(2), 125–135. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996
.0013
Morrow, S. L., Gore, P. A., & Campbell, B. W. (1996). The application of a sociocognitive framework to the career development of lesbian women and gay men [Special
issue: Vocational Issues of Lesbian Women and Gay Men]. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 48(2), 136–148. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1996.0014
Nauta, M. M., Saucier, A. M., & Woodard, L. E. (2001). Interpersonal inﬂuences on
students’ academic and career decisions: The impact of sexual orientation. Career
Development Quarterly, 49(4), 352–362.

296

Career Development and Counseling

O’Neil, M. E., McWhirter, E. H., & Cerezo, A. (2008). Transgender identities
and gender variance in vocational psychology: Recommendations for practice,
social advocacy, and research. Journal of Career Development, 34(3), 286–308.
doi:10.1177/0894845307311251
O’Ryan, L. W., & McFarland, W. P. (2010). A phenomenological exploration of
the experiences of dual-career lesbian and gay couples. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 88(1), 71–79.
Pepper, S. M., & Lorah, P. (2008). Career issues and workplace considerations for
the transsexual community: Bridging a gap of knowledge for career counselors
and mental health care providers. Career Development Quarterly, 56(4), 330–343.
Phillips, J. C., Ingram, K. M., Smith, N. G., & Mindes, E. J. (2003). Methodological and content review of lesbian-, gay-, and bisexual-related articles in
counseling journals: 1990–1999. Counseling Psychologist, 31(1), 25–62. doi:10.1177
/0011000002239398
Pope, M. (1992). Bias in the interpretation of psychological tests. In S. H. Dwarkin &
F. Gutierrez (Eds.), Counseling gay men and lesbians: Journey to the end of the rainbow
(pp. 456–462). Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Pope, M. S., Prince, J. P., & Mitchell, K. (2000). Responsible career counseling with
lesbian and gay students. In D. A. Luzzo (Ed.), Career counseling of college students:
An empirical guide to strategies that work (pp. 267–282). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10362-015
Prince, J. P. (1995). Inﬂuences on the career development of gay men. Career
Development Quarterly, 44(2), 168–177.
Prince, J. P. (1997a). Assessment bias affecting lesbian, gay male and bisexual
individuals. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 30(2),
82–87.
Prince, J. P. (1997b). Career assessment with lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals.
Journal of Career Assessment, 5(2), 225–238. doi:10.1177/106907279700500208
Prince, J. P., & Potoczniak, M. J. (2012). Using psychological assessment tools with
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender clients. In S. H. Dwarkin & M. Pope (Eds.),
Casebook for counseling lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons and their families
(pp. 319–328). Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Rachlin, K. (2002). Transgender individuals’ experiences of psychotherapy. International Journal of Transgenderism, 6(1).
Ragins, B. R., Singh, R., & Cornwell, J. M. (2007). Making the invisible visible: Fear
and disclosure of sexual orientation at work. Journal of Applied Psychology 92(4),
1103–1118.
Ratts, M. J., Toporek, R. L., & Lewis, J. A. (Eds.). (2010). ACA advocacy competencies:
A social justice framework for counselors. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling
Association.
Rosario, M., Schrimshaw, E. W., & Hunter, J. (2004). Ethnic/racial differences in the
coming-out process of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths: A comparison of sexual
identity development over time [Special issue: Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Racial
and Ethnic Minority Individuals: Empirical Explorations]. Cultural Diversity and
Ethnic Minority Psychology, 10(3), 215–228. doi:10.1037/1099-9809.10.3.215

Career Development of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Individuals

297

Rostosky, S. S., & Riggle, E. D. B. (2011). Marriage equality for same-sex couples:
Counseling psychologists as social change agents. Counseling Psychologist, 39(7),
956–972. doi:10.1177/0011000011398398
Schilt, K. (2006). Just one of the guys? How transmen make gender visible at work.
Gender & Society, 20(4), 465–490. doi:10.1177/0891243206288077
Schmidt, C. K., Miles, J. R., & Welsh, A. C. (2011). Perceived discrimination
and social support: The inﬂuences on career development and college adjustment of LGBT college students. Journal of Career Development, 38(4), 293–309.
doi:10.1177/0894845310372615
Schmidt, C. K., & Nilsson, J. E. (2006). The effects of simultaneous developmental
processes: Factors relating to the career development of lesbian, gay, and bisexual
youth. Career Development Quarterly, 55(1), 22–37.
Schneider, M. S., & Dimito, A. (2010). Factors inﬂuencing the career and academic
choices of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. Journal of Homosexuality,
57(10), 1355–1369. doi:10.1080/00918369.2010.517080
Schultheiss, D. E. P. (2003). A relational approach to career counseling: Theoretical
integration and practical application. Journal of Counseling & Development, 81,
301–310.
Sue, D. W., Arredondo, P., & McDavis, R. J. (1992). Multicultural counseling
competencies and standards: A call to the profession. Journal of Multicultural
Counseling and Development, 20(2), 64–88.
Super, D. E. (1990). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. In
D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development: Applying contemporary
theories to practice (2nd ed., pp. 197–261). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Tiedeman, D. V., & O’Hara, R. P. (1963). Career development: Choice and adjustment.
New York, NY: College Entrance Examination Board.
Tomlinson, M. J., & Fassinger, R. E. (2003). Career development, lesbian identity
development, and campus climate among lesbian college students. Journal of
College Student Development, 44(6), 845–860. doi:10.1353/csd.2003.0078
Waldo, C. R. (1999). Working in a majority context: A structural model of heterosexism as minority stress in the workplace. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46(2),
218–232. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.46.2.218
Walsh, W. B., & Betz, N. E. (1995). Tests and assessment (3rd ed.). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Whitcomb, D. H., & Loewy, M. I. (2006). Diving into the hornet’s nest: Situating
counseling psychologists in LGB social justice work. In R. L. Toporek, L. H.
Gerstein, N. A. Fouad, G. Roysircar, & T. Israel (Eds.), Handbook for social justice in
counseling psychology: Leadership, vision and action (pp. 215–230). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Worthington, R. L., & Reynolds, A. L. (2009). Within-group differences in sexual
orientation and identity. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(1), 44–55. doi:10.1037
/a0013498

C H A P T E R 11

Personality, Career Development,
and Occupational Attainment
STEVEN D. BROWN AND ANDREAS HIRSCHI

R

its relation to life outcomes is a vibrant
ﬁeld of inquiry with important implications for career development
practice. An increasing number of studies have shown that people’s
relatively enduring personality traits relate to a variety of career and workrelated outcomes. In a meta-analytic review, Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi,
and Goldberg (2007) found that personality traits explained unique variance
in both long-term unemployment rates and occupational stability over and
above intelligence and socioeconomic status, both of which had already been
found to be important predictors of these work outcomes. In another metaanalysis of predictors of career success, Ng, Eby, Sorensen, and Feldman
(2005) found that personality traits predicted other indices of occupational
attainment as well, including salary, number of promotions, and career
satisfaction. Although current research (e.g., Roberts et al., 2007) also suggests
that personality traits explain only a small percentage of variance in these
career outcomes, their contributions are still substantial enough (alone and
when compared to the variance accounted for by other factors) to warrant
consideration in career development and counseling.
This chapter discusses what we currently know about normal personality and its role in career development, choice making, and occupational
attainment. We begin by providing an overview of different perspectives
on the role of personality in career development and then discuss the
structure of normal personality, focusing speciﬁcally on ﬁve major personality traits (known as the Big 5) that have been studied extensively in
the literature. We then review research that has linked the Big 5 personality traits with career outcomes across the life span and conclude with
ESEARCH ON PERSONALITY AND

299

300

Career Development and Counseling

a set of counseling and preventive implications that can be derived from
the research.
PERSPECTIVES ON THE RELATION OF PERSONALITY
AND LIFE OUTCOMES
There are two basic models of how to explain relations between personality
and career and life outcomes. The trait perspective (McCrae et al., 2000)
focuses on the stability of traits and posits that traits represent endogenous
basic tendencies of thinking, feeling, and acting that are shaped largely by
biology and lead to characteristic ways of adapting to the different environmental settings in which individuals interact. Thus, extraversion, as a trait
that is largely inherited and biologically determined, leads people to think,
feel, and act in particular ways in their natural environments (e.g., to feel
comfortable in and approach social situations versus feeling uncomfortable
and avoiding them). This perspective is supported by research showing
signiﬁcant genetic and limited environmental (e.g., parental) inﬂuences on
traits, similar manifestations of traits across cultures, and temporal stability
of traits (McCrae et al., 2000).
A different perspective is proposed by the plasticity model of personality
change, which posits that traits are fairly stable aspects of people’s personalities but that personality change is possible and, indeed, probable. According
to this view, personality is completely shaped neither by biology nor by the
environment. Rather, personality development is a by-product of a dynamic
interaction between persons and their environments that results in both trait
stability and change (Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner, 2005). According to this perspective, much of the stability in adult personality can indeed be explained
by genetic factors. However, personality traits also show signiﬁcant stability
over time due to niche-building processes; people are passive victims of
neither their environments nor their genes and actively create, seek out,
and remain in environments that are congruent with their traits. Thus, trait
stability (more on this later in the chapter) is a function of both biology and
niche building.
However, as we will also see later, traits are not entirely stable because
not only do people select environments that are correspondent with their
personalities (niche building) but also environments, once entered, have an
impact on people’s personalities. This perspective is supported by metaanalytic research showing signiﬁcant normative changes in personality until
about the age of 50, with major changes seeming to occur in early adulthood
rather than in adolescence (Roberts & Del Vecchio, 2000; Roberts, Walton, &
Viechtbauer, 2006). Other research has shown that occupational attainment

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

301

among men is associated with increases in dependability, responsibility,
independence, and success motivation (Elder, 1969). Among women, it has
been found that participation in the labor force is associated with increases
in dominance, independence, and self-conﬁdence (Clausen & Gilens, 1990;
Roberts, 1997).
In sum, it is likely that personality traits play several roles in the career
development process. In particular, (a) traits represent speciﬁc biological
temperaments that affect how people think, feel, and act in their careers and
work lives; (b) people actively seek out educational and work environments
that correspond to and reinforce their personalities; (c) people shape their
environments to better ﬁt their personality traits; and (d) people react to and
change their traits based on environmental experiences.
THE STRUCTURE AND STABILITY OF NORMAL PERSONALITY
Although research on personality has a long history dating back to at
least World War I with the development of the Woodworth Personal Data
Sheet, this history has been quite checkered until the past 30 or so years. A
major problem that beset early personality research was the lack of a clear
theoretical structure that could parsimoniously account for the covariation
found among a large and ever growing number of personality traits. Looking
back at past personality research in industrial and organizational psychology,
Hogan and Roberts (2000) concluded: ‘‘There are thousands of personality
measures in the published literature’’ (p. 6) and that the research was ‘‘in
conceptual disarray, with no overarching theoretical paradigm’’ (p. 7).
Fortunately, ﬁndings have converged over the past 30 or so years to suggest
that ﬁve major personality constructs or traits, referred to as the Big 5, may
be sufﬁcient to describe the basic dimensions of normal personality (Mount
& Barrick, 1995). These ﬁve traits (commonly labeled neuroticism or emotional
stability, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness) have been
found via factor analyses of nearly every major personality inventory (e.g.,
Costa & McCrae, 1985, 1986) and through study of trait adjectives in a variety
of languages (Goldberg, 1990). They also emerge in both self-reports and
in observer ratings (e.g., spouses, peers, teachers, and guidance counselors)
(e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1985). Finally, large-scale meta-analyses have shown
that these ﬁve traits may also generalize across cultures (e.g., Salgado,
1997) and predict many important life outcomes, including work choice,
performance and satisfaction, and occupational attainment and success. In
the remainder of this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne each of the ﬁve traits. We
then summarize data on the stability of these traits and the implications of
stability data for practice.

302

Career Development and Counseling

Neuroticism or Emotional Stability
Neuroticism generally refers to a lack of positive adjustment and emotional
stability and is associated with the experience of a wide variety of negative
emotions (e.g., sadness, anxiety, guilt). People high in neuroticism (or low on
emotional stability) tend also to report themselves to be self-conscious and
vulnerable and may respond impulsively in their lives (Costa & McCrae,
1992). Evidence suggests that neurotic individuals are especially attentive
to the negative consequences of their (and others’) actions and choices, are
especially affected by negative events, perceive events as more negative than
do people lower on this trait, and often display less satisfaction with their
lives and more indecision than those who score lower on this dimension
(e.g., Suls & Martin, 2005). By contrast, those who score low on measures
of neuroticism tend to be emotionally stable, calm, relaxed, and capable of
facing stressful situations without becoming rattled (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Extraversion
Extraverts tend to be socially oriented (e.g., warm and gregarious), active
(e.g., adventuresome and assertive), and surgent (e.g., dominant and ambitious). Additionally, extraverts tend to report greater levels of positive
emotionality (e.g., happiness, joy) and to have larger friendship networks
than introverts (e.g., Watson & Clark, 1997). Some investigators (e.g., Roberts
et al., 2006) have suggested that extraversion is deﬁned primarily by two
lower-order trait complexes having to do with social dominance (e.g., dominance, assertiveness, and self-conﬁdence in social contexts) and social vitality
(e.g., sociability, gregariousness, energy level, and positive affect). Regardless of how lower-order traits (i.e., facets) are clustered, most conceptions
of extraversion include warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activeness,
excitement seeking, and positive emotionality as core facets (Costa & McCrae,
1992). Introverts (i.e., those scoring low on a measure of extraversion) tend
to be reserved (but not necessarily unfriendly), lack the energy that more
extraverted individuals display, and prefer being alone to being with others
(Costa & McCrae, 1992).
It is important to note at this juncture that neuroticism and extraversion
both contain affective dimensions: For neuroticism, it is a tendency to experience negative emotion across time and situations; for extraversion, it is the
tendency to experience positive emotions. Parallel research on the structure
of human emotions has suggested that two dimensions (positive affectivity
and negative affectivity) provide a comprehensive way to understand human
temperament (Watson & Tellegen, 1985). Individuals predisposed to display
high levels of positive affectivity (PA) generally report experiencing a variety of positive emotions (e.g., joy, happiness, excitement, enthusiasm), and

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

303

those predisposed to negative affectivity (NA) report experiencing a variety
of negative emotions (e.g., anxiety, guilt, fear, anger). These two dimensions
of affective temperament have also been found to be mostly independent
(Watson & Tellegen, 1985), with the low end of PA being associated with
feelings of boredom, lack of excitement, and dullness (rather than negative
emotion). Those low on NA tend to report being calm and relaxed (but not
necessarily happy or elated). NA has been found to correlate highly with
neuroticism and may represent the affective dimension of this trait, while
PA may represent the affective dimension of extraversion.
Openness
Open individuals tend to be imaginative and curious, original and ﬂexible
in their thinking, broadminded and liberal, receptive to their feelings and
emotions, appreciative of art and beauty, and often see themselves as nonconformists (Costa & McCrae, 1992). They actively seek out new experiences,
see such experiences as opportunities for growth (rather than as challenges
to their self-esteem), and are comfortable in ambiguous situations. There is
also evidence (DeNeve & Cooper, 1998) that those high in openness experience emotions (whether positive or negative) more intensely than those
who are less open. Those scoring low on measures of openness tend to
be more conventional and conservative, prefer familiar to novel situations,
and experience their emotions less intensely than do more open individuals
(Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Agreeableness
Agreeable individuals tend to be cooperative versus competitive with others
and trusting versus cynical about the motives of others. They tend to be
straightforward and deferent in their interactions with others and describe
themselves (and are described by others) as caring, empathic, good-natured,
forgiving, and tolerant (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Agreeableness also seems to
be deﬁned by a high motivation to achieve interpersonal intimacy (McCrae
& Costa, 1991) and to get along with others in pleasant and satisfying
relationships (Organ & Lingl, 1995). Agreeable individuals are also altruistic
and willing to assist others in need of help versus being self-centered and
reluctant to get involved in the problems of others (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness seems to be described by three primary facets: achievement orientation (e.g., being goal directed, hardworking, and persistent),

304

Career Development and Counseling

dependability (e.g., being responsible and self-disciplined), and orderliness
(e.g., being planful and organized). Conscientious persons also think carefully before acting and are often considered cautious and deliberate (Costa
& McCrae, 1992). Thus, persons scoring high on conscientiousness tend to
display high levels of self-control and a will to achieve, in addition to being
dependable, planful, deliberate, and organized in various domains of their
lives (e.g., at work and in relationships). Those scoring low tend to be more
undependable and less reliable, lack ambition, procrastinate in completing
tasks, and are more easily discouraged than those scoring higher on this trait
(Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Stability of the Big 5
Does personality change over the life course? The answer, as we implied
in an earlier section of this chapter, is no, yes, and it depends. There are
three different ways to conceptualize and measure personality change (or its
opposite—stability). The ﬁrst is via correlating scores obtained from a single
group of persons assessed at two different times, with the time intervals
between the two testing sessions ranging from as short as a few weeks to
as long as 30 years. This method yields an index of rank-order stability and
addresses the degree to which individuals maintain their rank order with
same-age peers across testing intervals. A high correlation suggests that
individuals largely maintain their rank orders across testing periods. Thus,
a correlation obtained on a measure of extraversion of, say, .70 (a rather high
correlation) over a 20-year test-retest period would suggest that persons who
were the most extraverted among their peers at 18 are also among the most
extraverted at 38.
The second method tracks the mean scores obtained by cohorts of people
over time. This method yields an index of mean score stability or change
and provides an index of normative change. For example, if the mean
scores obtained on a measure of extraversion show longitudinal increases
over testing periods, it is assumed that people as a group become more
extraverted over time. The third method tracks changes in individuals’ scores
(or personality proﬁles) over time and addresses questions of individual
change or stability.
The current evidence suggests that the Big 5 traits show very high levels
of rank-order stability (correlations in the .70 to .80 range), even over 20to 30-year testing windows (e.g., McCrae & Costa, 1999). Thus, it appears
that personality is quite stable—that highly neurotic, extraverted, open,
agreeable, or conscientious people, when compared to their lower-scoring
peers, remain among the most neurotic, extraverted, open, agreeable, or
conscientious at other periods in their lives. This level of stability is probably

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

305

due to the combination of heredity and niche-building experiences that we
noted earlier.
A different picture, however, emerges when one looks at the data on
mean or normative change. These data suggest that personality does change
over the life course. For example, Roberts and colleagues (2006) conducted
a meta-analysis of normative personality change and found that all ﬁve
personality traits (especially emotional stability, conscientiousness, and the
social dominance aspect of extraversion) showed changes over the life course,
with changes being most pronounced in early adulthood between the ages of
22 and 30. In other words, people in general tend to become more emotionally
stable, conscientious, assertive, socially dominant, and socially self-conﬁdent
during their early adult years. Roberts and colleagues (2006) hypothesized
that age-graded experiences organized around normative developmental
tasks in young adulthood (e.g., ﬁnding work, establishing relationships,
entering into marriage, raising a family, becoming involved in a community)
may propel people to become more emotionally stable, conscientious, and
socially dominant and conﬁdent during the early adult years. They also
suggested that more attention should be given to understanding the early
adult years in addition to the adolescent years.
These two sources of stability data are not incompatible. They simply
suggest that although people may collectively show age-graded changes in
their personalities, individuals themselves seem to maintain their standing
within their age cohorts. For example, people may become more emotionally
stable during their early adult years, but the most stable at 22 are likely to
remain among the most stable at 30.
The third type of research that tracks individual stability and change has
shown that some people do make substantial personality changes over their
life course. Emerging evidence has also begun to provide some potential
explanations for changes in personality, where such changes occur. Roberts,
Caspi, and Mofﬁtt (2003) studied an educationally and occupationally diverse
sample of young adults at 18 and again at 26. Two important sets of
ﬁndings emerged from this study. First, traits associated with neuroticism,
extraversion (both sociability and dominance), and conscientiousness at
18 years of age predicted a variety of positive work outcomes at the age of
26. For example, adolescents who scored high on negative emotionality (a
component of neuroticism) at 18 occupied less prestigious jobs, were less
satisﬁed with their jobs (regardless of where they were working), achieved
fewer promotions at work, and had experienced more ﬁnancial difﬁculties at
age 26 than did those scoring lower on this trait. On the ﬂip side, adolescents
who were more emotionally stable, conscientious, sociable, and dominant at
18 were more likely than their lower-scoring counterparts to report higher
levels of job satisfaction (again regardless of occupation) and career success

306

Career Development and Counseling

at 26 and to report greater ﬁnancial solvency. These ﬁndings provide support
for other data we discuss later in the chapter (and have already mentioned)
that personality is an important predictor of a variety of different work
outcomes.
The second set of ﬁndings, however, points to possible mechanisms for
personality change, namely, that occupational attainment, job satisfaction,
and ﬁnancial security may be sources of personality change. This study
replicated the types of normative changes that we discussed earlier: that
traits associated with emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness tended to increase over the course of the study. However, occupational
attainment, job satisfaction, and ﬁnancial security seemed to accelerate these
changes. In other words, young adults who had achieved occupational
success and satisfaction and ﬁnancial security showed more pronounced
increases in emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness than
did those who had not achieved the same types of occupational and ﬁnancial
success at 26.
These ﬁndings suggest to us that helping adolescents and young adults
achieve occupationally and ﬁnd satisfying jobs may affect their personality
development. It is true that certain personality traits have the potential
to set people on a course for a less than satisfying occupational future.
However, it might also be true that effective career counseling can, to some
degree, help people ﬁt their personalities more seamlessly into their work
(i.e., ﬁnd their niches) and, in the long run, change their life courses and
grow their personalities. This is an important topic for further research, and
many chapters in this book provide readers with excellent suggestions for
improving career intervention effectiveness. We turn next to a discussion of
the role of personality in career development across the life span.

THE RELATIONS OF PERSONALITY TO CAREER OUTCOMES
ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
Most theories of career development (see Hartung, Chapter 4; Savickas,
Chapter 6, this volume) suggest that the ability to implement a sound vocational choice (ﬁnd one’s niche, as it were) and subsequently adjust to one’s
work is a developmental process that begins in childhood and accelerates
during the adolescent and young adult years. Major developmental tasks
of adolescence and young adulthood involve (a) exploring one’s self and
the occupational world, (b) crystallizing interests and forming a vocational
identity, (c) developing educational and occupational aspirations, (d) engaging in career planning, and (e) specifying an initial occupational choice. In

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

307

addition, engagement in these developmental tasks seems to require that
people possess the conﬁdence as well as the skills to accomplish them
successfully. Tasks of subsequent developmental periods involve implementing a choice (i.e., ﬁnding a job or completing necessary education)
and achieving satisfaction and success at work. In this section, we review
research relevant to each of these major developmental tasks, starting with
tasks involved in the exploration stage of career development. We also review
research on the relationship between personality and career conﬁdence (i.e.,
self-efﬁcacy beliefs in being able to accomplish these developmental tasks).
We then review research on the role of personality in later development
periods, including job ﬁnding, work satisfaction and performance, and
occupational attainment.
Personality and Career Exploration
Personality traits are related to the degree to which adolescents engage
in career exploration activities. The most consistent ﬁndings reveal that
conscientiousness, extraversion, and emotional stability are implicated in the
career exploration process among high school and college students, with the
strongest effects attributed to conscientiousness (Reed, Bruch, & Haase, 2004;
Rogers & Creed, 2011; Rogers, Creed, & Ian Glendon, 2008). In particular,
it appears that students who are more goal directed, achievement oriented,
organized, and planful tend to engage more actively in career exploration
activities than do those who are less conscientious. In addition, the relation
of extraversion to exploration may be due to the fact that extraverts tend to
have more energy and tend to be more proactive in their lives than those
who are less extraverted (McCrae & Costa, 1999). Extraverted students may
also feel more comfortable seeking information from others as part of career
exploration than do less extraverted students. Finally, career exploration
entails self-reﬂection and environmental exploration (Zikic & Hall, 2009)
that might be anxiety provoking to less emotionally stable youngsters.
Research also suggests that more versus less neurotic individuals tend to
use a variety of avoidance strategies to cope with anxiety (e.g., Brown et al.,
2012). Thus, avoiding exploration activities, although less adaptive in the
long run, might in the short run allow less emotionally stable students to
cope with the anxiety elicited by the exploration process.
Personality and Vocational Interests
Personality seems to be related to the types of interests that people develop,
as well as to their overall levels of vocational interests. Many empirical

308

Career Development and Counseling

studies have established that vocational interest types, as represented by
Holland’s RIASEC model (Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume), are distinct
from, but meaningfully related to, basic personality traits (Mount, Barrick,
Scullen, & Rounds, 2005). For example, two meta-analyses have found consistent relationships among several Big 5 personality traits and RIASEC interest
types (Barrick, Mount, & Gupta, 2003; Larson, Rottinghaus, & Borgen, 2002).
Both studies found that extraversion was related to Social and Enterprising interests and that openness was related to Artistic and Investigative
interests. Somewhat less consistent were ﬁndings linking agreeableness with
Social interests and conscientious with Conventional interests. There is some
evidence, however, that agreeableness might serve to differentiate between
those with Social versus Enterprising interests (Costa, McCrae, & Holland,
1984). That is, although both Enterprising and Social types (in Holland’s
schema) tend to score above average on various measures of extraversion,
Social individuals (e.g., counselors, teachers) tend to score higher on measures of agreeableness than do more Enterprising types (e.g., salespeople
and politicians). Meanwhile, Sullivan and Hansen (2004) found that different facets of openness may distinguish between those having Artistic
and Investigative interests. Investigative interests were related positively
to openness to ideas (and negatively to openness to feelings), and Artistic
interests showed the strongest associations with an openness facet reﬂecting
a deep appreciation for art and beauty (aesthetics).
In addition to the content of individuals’ interests (i.e., the ﬁelds in
which people express their interests), personality also tends to be related
to the absolute levels of interests that people display (i.e., their interest
proﬁle elevation; Bullock & Reardon, 2005; Darcy & Tracey, 2003). The most
consistent ﬁnding is that openness is positively related to proﬁle elevation
(Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997; Costa et al., 1984; De Fruyt & Mervielde,
1997; Fuller, Holland, & Johnston, 1999; Gottfredson & Jones, 1993; Hirschi,
2009; Holland, Johnston, & Asama, 1994). Other studies have found that
neuroticism relates negatively to interest proﬁle elevation (Ackerman &
Heggestad, 1997; De Fruyt & Mervielde, 1997; Fuller et al., 1999; Holland
et al., 1994).
In other words, adolescents’ level of openness to new experiences and
ideas may be reﬂected in their vocational interests—more open individuals
report higher levels of interest in all RIASEC areas than do persons who are
less open. There are also data to suggest that such proﬁle elevation provides
people with greater ﬂexibility in their choices because of their interest and
comfort in a variety of different types of occupational settings (Darcy &
Tracey, 2003). A high level of neuroticism may have the opposite effect; it
may result in lower levels of interest across interest areas and less ﬂexibility
in arriving at a satisfying career choice.

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

309

Personality and Vocational Identity Development
Vocational identity is a central construct of several extant theories (see Nauta,
Chapter 3; Hartung, Chapter 4; and Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume) and
can be deﬁned as the development of a coherent view of oneself as a worker.
Achieving a clearly deﬁned vocational identity involves understanding
how important work is vis-à-vis other roles; developing a clear perception
of one’s vocational interests, abilities, goals, and values; and linking this
self-knowledge with career roles. A well-developed vocational identity is
commonly assumed to be a cornerstone of successful career development and
to be essential to mastering other career development tasks (see Skorikov &
Vondracek, 2007, for a review).
A number of studies have revealed that vocational identity achievement
is related to personality traits. For example, high school and college students who have achieved a clear and coherent vocational identity report
lower levels of neuroticism and higher levels in conscientiousness, extraversion, openness, and agreeableness (e.g., Clancy & Dollinger, 1993; Luyckx,
Soenens, & Goossens, 2006). In an exemplary longitudinal study of female
Belgian undergraduates, Luyckx and colleagues (2006) showed that personality traits and identity development were reciprocally related with traits
having an effect on identity development and also that success in identity
development affected subsequent personality traits. Consistent with other
research that we have already reviewed, conscientiousness predicted an
increase in identity achievement, and identity achievement, in turn, predicted increases in conscientiousness. This study, like those discussed earlier
in the chapter, suggests another avenue for personality change—by helping
students and young adults in the identity development process.
Personality and Educational and Career Aspirations
Educational and career aspirations are important components of career
development and are stressed in Super’s theory of career development
(Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume) and social cognitive career theory (Lent,
Chapter 5, this volume). Longitudinal studies have also shown that educational and career aspirations relate to later educational and career attainment
(Schoon & Parsons, 2002). Moreover, research indicates that the educational
and career aspirations of high school and college students may be meaningfully related to certain personality traits.
One trait that has been repeatedly shown to relate to higher educational
aspirations is openness. Several studies with college students (Gasser, Larson, & Borgen, 2004; Rottinghaus, Lindley, Green, & Borgen, 2002) and
secondary students (Salami, 2008) have reported that students with higher
levels of openness (i.e., those who tend to be insightful, intellectual, and

310

Career Development and Counseling

open-minded) have higher educational goals than their classmates who are
lower on this trait. Hirschi (2010) investigated career aspirations in relation
to traits from a different perspective by coding aspirations of Swiss adolescents according to the content dimensions of things versus people and
data versus ideas (Prediger, 1982). The results of this 1-year longitudinal
study showed that extraversion related negatively to the development of
career goals involving dealing with things (e.g., mechanic) and positively to
the development of goals involving dealing with people (e.g., retail sales).
Openness related negatively to the development of goals dealing with data
(e.g., ofﬁce clerk) and positively to goals involving working with ideas (e.g.,
graphic designer). In sum, although more research is needed to establish
how traits are related to career aspirations, students’ personalities seem to
be related to both the level and content of their aspirations. Openness seems
to relate to the levels of aspirations reported by both high school and college
students, and other personality traits relate more to the content of students’
aspirations.
Personality and Career Planning
Only a few studies have investigated the relation of personality traits to
the degree to which students engage in career planning (e.g., set shortand long-term goals for themselves and develop coherent plans for acquiring necessary education and training and entering occupations of choice).
Rogers and Creed (2011) and Hirschi, Niles, and Akos (2011) showed that
neuroticism was negatively related to career planning among groups of
Australian high school and Swiss secondary students, respectively. It has
also been found that high school and college students higher in extraversion,
conscientiousness, and openness (e.g., Rogers & Creed, 2011) report engaging in more career planning, with conscientiousness once again emerging as
the strongest predictor. These ﬁndings seem to suggest that less emotionally
stable students may avoid career planning activities like they avoid earlier career exploration activities. These ﬁndings also suggest, similar to the
ﬁndings for career exploration, that more organized, achievement-oriented,
goal-directed (conscientious), open, and extraverted students are more likely
to engage actively in the developmental task of planning for their future
careers than students who are less conscientious, open, and extraverted.
Personality and Career Decidedness
The relation of personality to career decidedness has been frequently studied
in the vocational psychology and career development literatures. One of the
most consistent ﬁndings is that neuroticism and its related traits (i.e., trait

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

311

negative affectivity, trait anxiety, depression, dysfunctional thinking) are
negatively related to levels of career decidedness (Feldman, 2003; Hirschi
et al., 2011; Lounsbury, Hutchens, & Loveland, 2005; Lucas & Wanberg, 1995;
Saunders, Peterson, Sampson, & Reardon, 2000). In a meta-analysis, Brown
and Rector (2008) also showed that these traits correlated highly with indices
of chronic indecision (i.e., the degree to which persons report long-term
difﬁculties with making decisions). It therefore appears that people who
report low emotional stability and related traits have more difﬁculties in
reaching a career decision and may also have difﬁculties making a variety
of other types of decisions as well (e.g., which school to attend, whether to
make a romantic commitment).
Other personality traits, although less frequently investigated, have also
been found to relate to career decidedness. Several studies have reported
that conscientiousness, agreeableness, and extraversion all relate positively
to career decidedness among high school and college students (Jin, Watkins,
& Yuen, 2009; Lounsbury et al., 2005; Wang, Jome, Hasse, & Bruch, 2006),
with the effect sizes obtained for conscientiousness rivaling those obtained
for neuroticism. Hence, it appears that adolescents and young adults who
are generally more reliable, careful, organized, self-disciplined, open, and
extraverted are not only likely to explore and plan more than their less
conscientious, extraverted, and open peers but are also more likely to arrive
at a career decision more efﬁciently.
Although more research is needed before we can make strong inferences
about the relation of Big 5 traits to career development tasks, evidence seems
to be emerging that a core set of traits seems to facilitate adolescents’ and
young adults’ career development. Speciﬁcally, emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness seem to be associated with more active career
exploration and planning, more coherent vocational identities, higher levels
of educational and vocational aspirations, and greater levels of career decidedness. In addition, openness seems to relate to career choice ﬂexibility (i.e.,
breadth of interests), career exploration, and career planning. These traits,
it will be recalled, were also identiﬁed as core traits related to occupational
attainment and ﬁnancial success by Roberts and colleagues (2003) and therefore have important implications for promoting career success across the
life course.
Personality and Career Conﬁdence
Research has also shown that successful completion of career development
tasks requires that people not only have the skills to complete them but also
the conﬁdence (or self-efﬁcacy beliefs) that they are personally capable of
doing what is required to be successful (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).

312

Career Development and Counseling

One of the most frequently studied types of self-efﬁcacy beliefs that have been
associated with personality are career decision-making self-efﬁcacy beliefs
(i.e., the conﬁdence that one can do what is necessary to make successful
vocational decisions). Neuroticism has been found to be negatively related
to career decision-making self-efﬁcacy among high school (Rogers et al.,
2008) and college students (Hartman & Betz, 2007; Wang et al., 2006).
Cross-sectional (Schyns & von Collani, 2002), longitudinal (Spurk & Abele,
2011), and meta-analytic (Judge & Ilies, 2002) studies have also found that
neuroticism is related negatively to work self-efﬁcacy, that is, the conﬁdence
in successfully mastering a variety of work-related tasks and challenges.
Neuroticism seems also to be negatively related to conﬁdence in successful
performance across different occupational areas (Hartman & Betz, 2007;
Nauta, 2004; Schaub & Tokar, 2005). Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest
that less emotionally stable individuals not only may question their abilities
to make career decisions but also may display less conﬁdence than more
emotionally stable individuals in their abilities to be successful in a variety
of different occupations.
Besides neuroticism, conscientiousness has also been found to predict
career conﬁdence. Meta-analyses (e.g., Judge & Ilies, 2002) have found signiﬁcant positive relations between conscientiousness and both work and
academic self-efﬁcacy beliefs, even after controlling for the positive effects of
general cognitive ability on self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Other studies have reported
positive relations between conscientiousness and career decision-making
self-efﬁcacy among undergraduate (Hartman & Betz, 2007), graduate (Jin
et al., 2009), and high school students (Rogers et al., 2008). Finally, several studies have found that extraversion also is a positive predictor of
career and academic self-efﬁcacy. More extraverted students and working
adults have shown more work and academic self-efﬁcacy in a meta-analysis
(Judge & Ilies, 2002), more vocational self-efﬁcacy in a 2-year longitudinal study among German university graduates (Spurk & Abele, 2011),
and more career decision-making self-efﬁcacy among U.S. college students
(Hartman & Betz, 2007; Wang et al., 2006). Once again, we ﬁnd that the
core constellation of emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness
relates not only to career development task success but also to the conﬁdence that students and young adults have in their abilities to complete
these tasks.
Personality, Job Finding, Work Adjustment,
and Occupational Attainment
The relationships of the Big 5 personality traits to job-ﬁnding success, work
satisfaction, and job satisfactoriness (performance) are reviewed in other

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

313

chapters (see Jome & Phillips, Chapter 21; Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this
volume) and therefore are only summarized brieﬂy in this section. We
also discuss some of the research cited earlier on the role of personality in
occupational attainment.
Personality and job-ﬁnding success. In general, research reveals that two of
the Big 5 personality traits—extraversion and conscientiousness—seem to
be related to job-ﬁnding success (see Jome & Phillips, Chapter 21). In
addition, meta-analyses (e.g., Kanfer, Wanberg, & Kantrowitz, 2001) have
suggested that these two personality traits may affect job search success via
two avenues. First, both extraversion and conscientiousness seem to have
direct effects on success at ﬁnding a job, perhaps because conscientious
and extraverted people tend to perform better in employment interviews
than their less conscientious and more introverted peers (more conscientious
job seekers also probably submit more well-developed resumes and other
materials). Second, these traits also seem to affect job-ﬁnding success via
their inﬂuences on the intensity and effort that job seekers put into the job
search process. Conscientious job seekers are organized and planful, tend to
set goals for their job search efforts, and persevere in the face of setbacks, and
more extraverted persons tend to be more comfortable (and self-efﬁcacious)
in using their social networks as sources of job leads. Thus, conscientiousness
and extraversion may give persons a competitive advantage when they are
seeking jobs. People displaying higher levels of these two traits tend to work
harder in the job search process, organize their efforts better, develop goals
to direct their job search efforts, and make use of more resources in the job
search process (especially interpersonal resources in the case of extraverts).
They may also feel more comfortable and efﬁcacious in job interviews
and may display in the interview characteristics that employers seek from
potential employees.
Personality and job satisfaction and satisfactoriness. Lent and Brown (Chapter
22, this volume) reviewed ﬁndings on the relationships between personality
traits and job satisfaction and satisfactoriness. The former (job satisfaction)
represents employees’ satisfaction with (liking of) their jobs. The latter (job
satisfactoriness) reﬂects employers’ satisfaction with their employees. Job
satisfaction is typically assessed via employee self-reports, and job satisfactoriness is typically measured by supervisor performance appraisals.
Meta-analyses (e.g., Heller, Watson, & Illies, 2004; Judge, Heller, & Mount,
2002) have suggested that emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness yield small (conscientiousness) to moderate (emotional stability
and extraversion) correlations with job satisfaction.

314

Career Development and Counseling

In terms of job satisfactoriness, supervisor performance appraisals seem
to be inﬂuenced by at least three different types of employee behaviors: task
performance, organizational citizenship behaviors, and counterproductive
work behaviors (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this volume). Task performance represents how well employees perform the job duties prescribed by
their job descriptions; organizational citizenship behaviors refer to extra-role
behaviors that contribute to organizational goals (e.g., helping and cooperating with others, showing commitment to the organization; see Borman, 2004).
Organizational citizenship behavior also includes behaviors that challenge
the status quo and offer innovative suggestions for organizational improvement (see Van Dyne & LePine, 1998). Counterproductive work behaviors
(as the name implies) detract from the organization’s goals and mission and
can include gossiping and spreading rumors about coworkers, engaging in
actions that harass or harm others, taking extra-long breaks, and violating
security procedures (see Rotundo & Sackett, 2002).
Meta-analytic investigations have shown that conscientiousness is related
to various indices of task performance (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991) as well
as to organizational citizenship and counterproductive work behaviors (e.g.,
Chiaburu, Oh, Berry, Li, & Gardner, 2011). Others of the Big 5 personality
traits have also been implicated in organizational citizenship and counterproductive work behaviors. For example, Chiaburu and colleagues (2011) found
that openness and agreeableness (and conscientiousness) were related to
cooperative types of organizational citizenship behavior, and extraversion
and openness (and conscientiousness) related to status quo–challenging
types of organizational citizenship behaviors. Thus, as Lent and Brown
(Chapter 22, this volume) summarized, it appears that employees who are
dispositionally cooperative (agreeable) and open to new experiences and
ideas (open) may be more likely to engage in the cooperative types of
citizenship behaviors that are valued during performance appraisals. Persons who are outgoing and assertive (extraversion) and open to change
(openness) may be more likely than less extraverted and open employees
to effectively challenge the status quo when such behavior is called for.
Conscientious employees (those who are goal directed, organized, planful,
and achievement oriented) seem to have an advantage over less conscientious employees in all major performance domains that are considered by
supervisors in employee appraisals.
Personality and occupational attainment. Large-scale prospective studies suggest that personality traits are not only related to employees’ satisfaction
and performance but also to their long-range occupational attainments (e.g.,
Roberts et al., 2003, 2007). The results of Roberts and colleagues’ (2003)

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

315

study, presented earlier in the section on the stability of the Big 5, suggested
that levels of emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness displayed at age 18 predicted participants’ subsequent (at age 26) levels of job
satisfaction, employment success, and ﬁnancial stability.
Roberts and colleagues (2007) meta-analytically combined the results
of large-scale longitudinal studies on the relationships between the Big
5 personality traits and success in three important domains of human
functioning: work, relationships, and health. Their analyses suggested that
childhood levels of emotional stability, extraversion, agreeableness, and
conscientiousness predicted attained occupational status 46 years later, even
after controlling for childhood intelligence (Judge, Higgins, Thoresen, &
Barrick, 1999). Further, Roberts and colleagues (2007) found that these Big 5
traits collectively accounted for as much variance in occupational attainment
as intelligence and socioeconomic status.
Roberts and colleagues (2007) cited several processes that might explain
how personality relates to occupational attainment. These processes include
(a) niche ﬁnding (i.e., successful people ﬁnd jobs that ﬁt with their dispositions and personalities), (b) recruitment effects (e.g., people are selected
into jobs and given preferential treatment on the basis of their personality
characteristics), (c) environmental shaping (e.g., successful people change
their work environments to better ﬁt their personalities), (d) attrition effects
(i.e., less well-ﬁtting employees leave, or are asked to leave, the work setting),
and (e) direct effects of personality on performance (e.g., certain personality
characteristics like conscientiousness naturally give rise to higher levels of
achievement via goal setting, self-efﬁcacy, and perseverance, and people
who possess these characteristics will achieve more at school and at work).
The reader is referred to Roberts and colleagues (2007) for a more complete
discussion of these processes. However, these ﬁndings clearly suggest that
the Big 5 traits (especially emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness and in certain conditions openness and agreeableness) relate in
important ways to career development, choice, adjustment, and attainment
across the life span. We next turn to the counseling, developmental, and
preventive implications of these ﬁndings.
COUNSELING, DEVELOPMENTAL, AND PREVENTIVE IMPLICATIONS
It should be clear from our review that personality traits can inﬂuence, to
some degree, persons’ success at negotiating major tasks of career development and in ﬁnding satisfaction and success in their work environments.
These data indicate that people’s levels of emotional stability, extraversion,
and conscientiousness are related positively to nearly every career-related
outcome, including (a) engagement in career exploration and planning

316

Career Development and Counseling

activities; (b) development of a vocational identity; (c) facility at, and perceived efﬁcacy in, making career decisions; and (d) subsequent levels of
job satisfaction and occupational attainment. Neuroticism is also related
negatively to the breadth of interests that adolescents and young adults
display, and openness seems to have the opposite effect, that is, to broaden
interests. Conscientiousness (along with extraversion) is also implicated in
individuals’ job-ﬁnding success, as well as in their work performance (i.e.,
task performance, organizational citizenship behaviors, and counterproductive work behaviors). Finally, several personality traits are also related to the
content of persons’ interests. Extraverted versus less extraverted people tend
to display social and enterprising interests, and openness is associated with
interests in artistic and investigative occupations. Agreeableness may serve
to differentiate between interests in social versus enterprising occupations,
and certain facets of openness may differentiate interests in artistic versus
investigative occupations.
Although research (e.g., Roberts et al., 2007) also shows that personality
traits account for only small amounts of variance in career outcomes (other
aspects of the person and his or her context are also important), we ﬁnd the
data sufﬁciently compelling that we typically ask clients early in counseling
(before or after the ﬁrst session) to complete a measure of the Big 5 personality traits like the NEO-Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI; Costa & McCrae,
1992; see Rottinghaus & Hauser, Chapter 17, this volume). We then use the
information provided by this assessment in two ways. First, we use personality information as another source of data to understand clients’ presenting
problems and help them, if necessary, ﬁnd good-ﬁtting occupations (i.e.,
help them ﬁnd their niches). Second, we use the data to help us structure
counseling to be most useful for clients.
Enhancing Understanding of Clients’ Presenting Concerns
and Niche Finding
Research on career counseling applications of personality data is amazingly
sparse and often not entirely helpful. We cite available research whenever
possible in this section but mainly rely on our clinical experiences when
drawing counseling implications. We have found that personality data can
be useful by enabling career counselors to gain a fuller understanding of
clients’ presenting concerns (e.g., needing to make or remake a choice, ﬁnd a
job, achieve greater satisfaction or satisfactoriness at work). Information on
clients’ personalities, we think, may also provide a vehicle for incorporating
preventive goals into career counseling.
In relation to establishing preventive goals, we have found it helpful to
provide clients with opportunities to learn strategies to manage the effects

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

317

of their personalities on their lives. To accomplish such preventive tasks, we
prefer, despite the data on trait stability, to view traits as a set of speciﬁc
behaviors that, like most other behaviors, can be broken down into smaller
segments and altered through observation and practice (see also Lent &
Brown, Chapter 22, this volume). In other words, our experiences suggest
that persons can learn to behave in trait-inconsistent ways when called for
by the demands of their environments if counseling (a) helps them gain
insights into how their personalities can affect the types of decisions they
make and the experiences they have and (b) provides a safe environment in
which to learn and practice trait-inconsistent behaviors. Although we have
no empirical data to support this position, we illustrate in the remainder
of this section strategies that we have used to promote the acquisition and
use of trait-inconsistent behaviors. The reader is referred to Brown, Ryan,
and McPartland (1996) and Lent and Brown (Chapter 22, this volume) for
additional strategies.
Using personality data to gain a fuller understanding of clients’ presenting concerns.
Neuroticism, conscientiousness, and openness represent traits that can affect
clients’ abilities to make decisions and achieve satisfaction and success at
work. They thus represent three good examples of how an understanding
of clients’ personalities can inform career counseling practice. They also
provide examples of our prevention focus, that is, how we work to help
clients learn to manage their personalities in their everyday interactions with
their work and nonwork environments.
Although the exact mechanisms by which neuroticism inﬂuences decisionmaking abilities and job satisfaction are not fully understood, two central
paths of inﬂuence that we have already discussed may be via the tendencies
of more versus less neurotic individuals to (a) focus on the negative aspects
of themselves, their choices, and environments and (b) use various avoidance
strategies to cope with the anxiety and other negative feelings occasioned by
such a style (see Brown et al., 2012). Thus, clients who score high (e.g., one
standard deviation or more above the mean) on a measure of neuroticism
may have trouble deciding on an educational or career option and see
more negative than positive consequences associated with most options
they have considered. As a result, such clients may have considered only
a small number of occupational options and may even have settled on a
less than optimal option as an avoidance strategy. Similarly, clients who are
seeking help for problems of job satisfaction may, if they also score high on a
neuroticism scale, view the conditions of their work environments (e.g., the
amount of work required of them, the support they receive from supervisors
and fellow workers, the clarity of their work roles) to be more troublesome
than do less neurotic clients (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this volume).

318

Career Development and Counseling

If assessment and interview results converge to conﬁrm that neuroticism
contributes to clients’ choice-making problems, we typically discuss this
with them and help them consider and weigh more carefully the positive
consequences of various choice options. We also have them consider options
they might have eliminated from consideration earlier in their lives and
discuss with them their reasons for eliminating these options. We employ
similar strategies with job-dissatisﬁed clients—help them consider the degree
to which their negative cognitive style may color perceptions at work,
evaluate the validity of these perceptions, and consider the validity of
alternative ways of viewing their work environments (see Lent & Brown,
Chapter 22, this volume).
For both types of clients (those seeking to make a choice and those
experiencing work dissatisfaction), we also try to help them understand how
their natural tendencies to focus on and magnify the negative aspects of their
choices, jobs, and other aspects of life might have caused them difﬁculties
in the past. We then suggest that this cognitive style can be managed by
learning how to use these tendencies as cues to refocus their attention
on more positive possibilities. We also assign homework between sessions
to practice this set of skills to resolve the problem that brought clients
to counseling (choice or dissatisfaction problems) and in other situations
(e.g., relationships) they encounter. Although these strategies are unlikely
to change clients’ personalities substantially, they can provide clients with
a set of skills they can use to manage the negative consequences of their
personality traits (e.g., neuroticism) in the future (see Brown et al., 1996).
Conscientiousness is another personality trait that can inﬂuence the
decision-making process. It can also inﬂuence clients’ success in ﬁnding
jobs and their performance appraisals at work. Clients who enter with
decision-making problems and concomitant low levels of conscientiousness
often need more help from counselors than others in gathering and processing information that will inform their decisions. They will also probably need
more help and support in carrying out these tasks than more conscientious
clients. Counselors working with clients experiencing performance problems
at work and low levels of conscientiousness may need ﬁrst to explore with
clients the degree to which speciﬁc aspects of conscientiousness (e.g., lack of
goal directedness or organization, poor time management or follow-through)
may be contributing to unsatisfactory performance appraisals. We then help
clients consider how they might alter these behaviors at work and whether
their level of conscientiousness has contributed to other difﬁculties they
have experienced in their lives. One focus of counseling becomes helping
clients set goals to behave in more conscientious ways at work and in other
areas of their lives. Although motivation to engage in such counter-trait
behavior may be low for less conscientious clients, reframing such behavior

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

319

as alterable with practice may increase clients’ motivation to enact such
behaviors in work settings and elsewhere.
Clients with problems in the job search process may also need special
assistance from counselors if they also display low levels of conscientiousness
or extraversion. Speciﬁcally, they may need help (a) setting job search goals
and actively pursuing these goals (conscientiousness) and (b) acquiring
the self-efﬁcacy beliefs, skills, and comfort required to access and make
effective use of their social networks (extraversion). Such clients may also
need more help in preparing for employment interviews than will more
conscientious and extraverted clients. In these cases, too, we try to help
clients consider how their levels of conscientiousness and introversion might
have affected other areas of their lives and to develop strategies to manage
trait-driven tendencies in the future.
Finally, clients scoring high on measures of openness may also seek
help from career counselors, especially for issues involved in making or
remaking career decisions. Although openness can provide people with
greater decision-making ﬂexibility because of their rather wide-ranging
interests, it can also lead to decision-making confusion precisely for the
same reason (i.e., wide-ranging interests). Thus, we have occasionally seen
clients exhibiting high levels of openness who were seeking help to choose
from a large number of occupational possibilities. We typically take a twopronged approach in working with these clients. We ﬁrst try to normalize
their decision-making confusion by discussing with them how their levels
of openness probably contribute to their current predicament, but that
being highly open also has a number of more positive consequences (e.g.,
excitement about exploring new ideas, enthusiasm for trying on new roles
and experiences, and heightened ﬂexibility). We then provide assistance
in decision making by supplementing vocational interest data with other
sources of information (e.g., needs and values, abilities, role salience, lifestyle
considerations, avocational interests). The outcome is often the identiﬁcation
of a best-ﬁtting set of occupations for further exploration and a discussion
about how clients can implement their wide-ranging interests in leisure and
volunteer pursuits.
Using personality data to enrich niche-ﬁnding efforts. Clients’ levels of extraversion and conscientiousness, as well as their openness and agreeableness, may
also provide diagnostic information for helping clients identify good-ﬁtting
occupational possibilities. Extraversion, as we have previously discussed,
is related to interest in social and enterprising activities and occupations.
Thus, clients who display above-average levels of extraversion may be
directed to consider these more people-oriented occupations. Their level of

320

Career Development and Counseling

agreeableness may then allow them to distinguish among people-oriented
occupations. Persons displaying above-average levels of agreeableness may
prefer social occupations (i.e., occupations involving helping and teaching
that typically attract cooperative, sympathetic, and empathic individuals),
while those scoring lower on a measure of agreeableness may ﬁnd enterprising occupations more satisfying (i.e., occupations involving selling and
persuading that attract more competitive individuals).
Openness, as we previously discussed, seems also to be related to client
interests. Open individuals seem to be attracted to investigative and artistic
occupations that allow for creativity, intellectual stimulation, and autonomy;
those who are less open may prefer more conventional occupations that
involve concrete work tasks. There is also evidence that different facets
of openness differentiate investigative and artistic occupations: People with
investigative interests (e.g., scientists) may be more open to new ideas than to
feelings, and those with artistic interests seem especially to have high levels
of aesthetic appreciation. Thus, personality information can complement
interest, value, and ability data and enable clients to more readily identify
their niches in the world of work.
Personality data can also be used in niche-ﬁnding efforts with persons
who are experiencing adjustment problems due to incongruence between
their personality traits and the requirements of their work environments. For
example, agreeable persons working in competitive, enterprising work environments may ﬁnd more satisfaction in a social environment that encourages
cooperation and is more congruent with their personalities. Similarly, more
introverted clients may ﬁnd occupations that require substantial levels of
social interactions or assertiveness less than satisfying places to work. A
less than open person may ﬁnd that working in occupations that require
creativity, intellectual stimulation, and autonomy (investigative and artistic) to be a poor ﬁt and a source of dissatisfaction. Finally, investigative
occupations may be more appealing to people whose openness is primarily
deﬁned by openness to ideas rather than feelings, whereas artistic occupations may be better niches for those scoring highest on an aesthetics facet
of openness.
For those who ﬁnd themselves in environments that are not congruent
with their personality traits, counseling can be directed at exploring ways to
(a) modify the current work environment (e.g., ﬁnd ways to be of service to
others instead of competing with them) or (b) change to jobs or occupations
that may offer a better ﬁt with their personalities. Where neither of these
options is viable, counseling may entail exploring nonwork outlets that
better allow one to express one’s personality than does the current work
setting (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22, this volume).

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

321

Using Personality Data to Structure Sessions and
Improve Effectiveness
Personality data may also allow counselors to plan their sessions and work
with clients more effectively. For example, counselors might anticipate that
clients scoring high versus low on measures of neuroticism may have chronic
problems in making important life decisions (Brown & Rector, 2008) and
may bring with them a constellation of other characteristics (e.g., tendency to
experience negative emotions and focus on negative outcome expectations)
that require individual (rather than group) counseling of a longer than typical
duration (see Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000). Some research has also suggested
that high levels of neuroticism might cause people to settle prematurely (as
an avoidance strategy) on a less than satisfying career choice (see Brown
et al., 2012).
There are meta-analytic data suggesting that many clients respond well
to four or ﬁve sessions of career counseling and that individual and group
forms of counseling may be equally effective for many clients (e.g., Brown &
Ryan Krane, 2000; Whiston, Brecheisen, & Stephens, 2003). However, our
clinical experiences suggest that these data might not hold well for clients
entering counseling with high levels of neuroticism and chronic indecisiveness (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000). The ﬁrst author, for example, once saw a
client who displayed rather high levels of neuroticism (scored two standard
deviations above the mean on the NEO-FFI Neuroticism scale) for 35 sessions of individual counseling that lasted approximately a year and a half.
She also scored rather high on the NEO-FFI Conscientiousness scale and in
the average ranges on the other three NEO-FFI scales. This client indicated
early in counseling that she frequently felt a good deal of anxiety in making
important decisions in her life and usually opted for the least threatening
option in these situations. She had chosen her current career ﬁeld because
she had little doubt that she had the skills to perform adequately in it but was
now seeking counseling because she was bored with her work and found it
to be exceptionally unchallenging.
Interest, value, and ability data had converged by the ﬁfth counseling
session to suggest several more challenging occupational options; the client
speciﬁcally noted that one of the options generated from these assessment
data was one that she had fantasized about for a number of years. She
chose as one goal in counseling to see if she could pursue this option.
The next 30 sessions focused, in part, on (a) helping her develop goals for
entry into this occupational ﬁeld (e.g., acquiring the necessary education
and persevering in these educational pursuits, generating support from her
family and social networks), (b) supporting her as she implemented her
goals, and (c) challenging her when she downplayed her accomplishments

322

Career Development and Counseling

and successes. Counseling also involved helping her learn to challenge her
negative cognitive style. By the end of counseling, she had successfully
completed her ﬁrst semester of full-time graduate study, acquired a mentor
in her ﬁeld, and seemed to be making progress in managing her personality
tendencies in school and other areas of her life.
Clients’ levels of conscientiousness may also have implications for how
counselors work with them. For example, clients displaying low levels of
conscientiousness may not follow through on between-session activities as
consistently as more conscientious clients. They might also fail to keep
counseling appointments as frequently as their more conscientious peers
(Costa & McCrae, 1992). The client discussed in the previous paragraphs
who had also scored high on the NEO-FFI Conscientiousness scale attended
every scheduled session over the 18 months of counseling and worked
very diligently to establish and accomplish between-session (and long-term)
goals. Thus, despite her high level of neuroticism, her conscientiousness
seemed to facilitate substantially the successes she achieved in counseling.
Others of the authors’ clients who seemed to be less conscientious, however,
have not fared as well and have required more strenuous efforts to keep
them on track (even for those with other personality traits that would have
suggested an easier course of counseling).
Implications for Preventive and Developmental Interventions
As we have previously suggested, there appears to be a core set of personality
traits (e.g., emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness) that can
have long-range effects on career development and occupational attainment.
These core traits seem to be related to the amount of career exploration
and planning undertaken by adolescents and young adults, as well as to
their conﬁdence in their abilities to make career decisions and to arrive at
a satisfying career choice. These traits have also been shown to relate to
different indices of career success in adulthood (e.g., work performance and
satisfaction, occupational attainment, and ﬁnancial stability). Openness has
also been implicated in career exploration and planning success.
These data suggest to us that the behaviors and attitudes associated with
these core traits may be important targets for early intervention efforts.
It is not clear whether early intervention efforts will result in substantial
personality changes (although they might, because traits seem to be more
malleable in youth than in adults). However, the personality data do suggest
that if we can help children and adolescents acquire more conscientious and
extraverted ways of behaving, as well as more positive ways of viewing
themselves and their futures, such efforts, if successful, might have longterm beneﬁts for their work and personal lives and help them ﬁnd their
niches and grow their personalities.

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

323

CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
In summary, we have attempted to show how an understanding of clients’
personalities (especially their levels of emotional stability, extraversion,
openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness) has implications for career
counseling practice. The most important points that we tried to make in this
chapter include the following:
• There appears to be a core set of traits (i.e., emotional stability, extraver-

sion, and conscientiousness) that seem to be related to all major career
development tasks and later occupational attainment. Openness also
seems to be related to several outcomes, including vocational identity
development, level of educational and career aspirations, involvement
in career planning, decision-making ﬂexibility, and willingness and
ability to engage in organizational citizenship behavior at work.
• Although personality traits (including all of the Big 5 traits) show high
levels of individual stability in adulthood, change is possible, especially
if persons engage in, or are helped to engage in, trait-congruent experiences. Helping adolescents and young adults ﬁnd their occupational
niches may not only improve their lives but also help them develop
their personalities in adaptive ways.
• Personality data might be collected routinely in counseling (at least as
routinely as information on interests, values, and abilities are collected).
• Personality data, if routinely collected, can enrich the counseling process
by providing important diagnostic information, facilitating clients’ niche
ﬁnding, and enabling counselors to better tailor counseling to the
uniqueness of each client.
• Personality, though related to a variety of important career outcomes,
accounts for only a small proportion of the variance in these outcomes.
There are, therefore, a variety of other personal and contextual variables
that inﬂuence career development and adjustment. However, helping
clients ﬁnd (at whatever age) their occupational niches (those places
where their personalities, interests, values, and abilities can ﬁnd a goodﬁtting home) may start them on the road to a more satisfying life,
regardless of where they started out.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, P. L., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests:
Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 219–245.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The big ﬁve personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1–26.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Gupta, R. (2003). Meta-analysis of the relationship
between the Five-Factor model of personality and Holland’s occupational types.
Personnel Psychology, 56, 45–74.

324

Career Development and Counseling

Borman, W. C. (2004). The concept of organizational citizenship behavior. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 238–241.
Brown, S. D., Hacker, J., Abrams, M., Carr, A., Rector, C., Lamp, K., Telander, K., &
Siena, A. (2012). Validation of a four factor model of career indecision. Journal of
Career Assessment, 20, 3–21.
Brown, S. D., & Rector, C. C. (2008). Conceptualizing and diagnosing problems
in vocational decision-making. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of
counseling psychology (vol. 4, pp. 392–407). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Brown, S. D., Ryan, N. E., & McPartland, E. B. (1996). Why are so many people happy
and what do we do with those who aren’t? Counseling Psychologist, 24, 751–757.
Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or ﬁve) sessions and a cloud of dust:
Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Bullock, E. E., & Reardon, R. C. (2005). Using proﬁle elevation to increase the
usefulness of the Self-Directed Search and other inventories. Career Development
Quarterly, 54(2), 175–183.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., & Shiner, R. L. (2005). Personality development: Stability
and change. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 453–484.
Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I. S., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The ﬁve-factor
model personality traits and organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 96, 1140–1166.
Clancy, S. M., & Dollinger, S. J. (1993). Identity, self, and personality: I. Identity
status and the ﬁve-factor model of personality. Journal of Research on Adolescence,
3(3), 227–245.
Clausen, J. A., & Gilens, M. (1990). Personality and labor force participation across
the life-course: A longitudinal study of women’s careers. Sociological Forum, 5,
595–618.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). The NEO Personality Inventory manual. Odessa,
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1986). Personality stability and its implications for
clinical psychology. Clinical Psychology Review, 6, 407–423.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Professional manual for the revised NEO
Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI).
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T. J., McCrae, R. R., & Holland, J. L. (1984). Personality and vocational
interests in an adult sample. Journal of Applied Psychology: An International Review,
69, 390–400.
Darcy, M., & Tracey, T. J. G. (2003). Integrating abilities and interests in career choice:
Maximal versus typical assessment. Journal of Career Assessment, 11, 219–237.
De Fruyt, F., & Mervielde, I. (1997). The ﬁve-factor model of personality and
Holland’s RIASEC interest types. Personality and Individual Differences, 23(1),
87–103.
DeNeve, K. M., & Cooper, H. (1998). The happy personality: A meta-analysis of 137
personality traits and subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 179–229.

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

325

Elder, G. H. (1969). Occupational mobility, life patterns, and personality. Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 10, 308–323.
Feldman, D. C. (2003). The antecedents and consequences of early career
indecision among young adults. Human Resource Management Review, 13(3),
499–499.
Fuller, B. E., Holland, J. L., & Johnston, J. A. (1999). The relation of proﬁle elevation
in the Self-Directed Search to personality variables. Journal of Career Assessment, 7,
111–123.
Gasser, C. E., Larson, L. M., & Borgen, F. H. (2004). Contributions of personality and
interests to explaining the educational aspirations of college students. Journal of
Career Assessment, 12(4), 347–365. doi:10.1177/1069072704266644
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative ‘‘description of personality’’: The Big 5 factor
structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1216–1229.
Gottfredson, G. D., & Jones, E. M. (1993). Psychological meaning of proﬁle elevation in the Vocational Preference Inventory. Journal of Career Assessment, 1,
35–48.
Hartman, R. O., & Betz, N. E. (2007). The ﬁve-factor model and career self-efﬁcacy:
General and domain-speciﬁc relationships. Journal of Career Assessment, 15(2),
145–161. doi:10.1177/1069072706298011
Heller, D., Watson, D., & Illies, R. (2004). The role of person versus situation in life
satisfaction: A critical examination. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 574–600.
Hirschi, A. (2009). Development and criterion validity of differentiated and elevated interests in adolescence. Journal of Career Assessment, 17(4), 384–401.
doi:10.1177/1069072709334237
Hirschi, A. (2010). Vocational interests and career goals: Development and relations
to personality in middle adolescence. Journal of Career Assessment, 18(3), 223–238.
doi:10.1177/1069072710364789
Hirschi, A., Niles, S. G., & Akos, P. (2011). Engagement in adolescent career
preparation: Social support, personality and the development of choice decidedness and congruence. Journal of Adolescence, 34(1), 173–182. doi:10.1016/
j.adolescence.2009.12.009
Hogan, R. T., & Roberts, B. W. (2000). A socioanalytic perspective on person/environment interactions. In W. B. Walsh, K. H. Craik, & R. H. Price (Eds.),
New directions in person-environment psychology (pp. 1–24). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holland, J. L., Johnston, J. A., & Asama, N. F. (1994). More evidence for the relationship between Holland’s personality types and personality variables. Journal of
Career Assessment, 2, 331–340.
Jin, L., Watkins, D., & Yuen, M. (2009). Personality, career decision self-efﬁcacy
and commitment to the career choices process among Chinese graduate students.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74(1), 47–52.
Judge, T. A., Heller, D., & Mount, M. K. (2002). Five-factor model of personality and
job satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 530–541.
Judge, T. A., Higgins, C. A., Thoresen, C. J., & Barrick, M. R. (1999). The big ﬁve
personality traits, general mental ability, and career success across the life span.
Personnel Psychology, 52, 621–652.

326

Career Development and Counseling

Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2002). Relationship of personality to performance motivation: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 797–807.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.87.4.797
Kanfer, R., Wanberg, C. R., & Kantrowitz, T. M. (2001). Job search and employment:
A personality-motivational analysis and meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 847–855.
Larson, L. M., Rottinghaus, P. J., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Meta-analyses of Big
Six interests and big ﬁve personality factors. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61(2),
217–239.
Lounsbury, J. W., Hutchens, T., & Loveland, J. M. (2005). An investigation of big ﬁve
personality traits and career decidedness among early and middle adolescents.
Journal of Career Assessment, 13(1), 25–39. doi:10.1177/106907270427027
Lucas, J. L., & Wanberg, C. R. (1995). Personality correlates of Jones’ threedimensional model of career indecision. Journal of Career Assessment, 3(3), 315–329.
doi:10.1177/106907279500300405
Luyckx, K., Soenens, B., & Goossens, L. (2006). The personality-identity interplay
in emerging adult women: Convergent ﬁndings from complementary analyses.
European Journal of Personality, 20(3), 195–215. doi:10.1002/per.579
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1991). Adding liebe und arbeit: The full ﬁve-factor
model of personality. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 227–232.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1999). A ﬁve-factor theory of personality. In L.
A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (vol. 2,
pp. 139–153). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Ostendorf, F., Angleitner, A., Hrebickova, M., Avia,
M. D., . . . Smith, P. B. (2000). Nature over nurture: Temperament, personality,
and life span development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(1),
173–186.
Mount, M. K., & Barrick, M. R. (1995). The Big 5 personality dimensions: Implications
for research and practice in human resource management. In G. Ferris (Ed.),
Research in personnel and human resources (Vol. 13, pp. 153–200). Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., Scullen, S. M., & Rounds, J. (2005). Higher-order
dimensions of the big ﬁve personality traits and the big six vocational interest
types. Personnel Psychology, 58(2), 447–478.
Nauta, M. M. (2004). Self-efﬁcacy as a mediator of the relationships between
personality factors and career interests. Journal of Career Assessment, 12(4), 381–394.
doi:10.1177/1069072704266653
Ng, T. W. H., Eby, L. T., Sorensen, K. L., & Feldman, D. C. (2005). Predictors of
objective and subjective career success. A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 58(2),
367–408.
Organ, D. W., & Lingl, A. (1995). Personality, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Social Psychology, 135, 339–350.
Prediger, D. J. (1982). Dimensions underlying Holland’s hexagon: Missing link
between interests and occupations? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 21, 259–287.

Personality, Career Development, and Occupational Attainment

327

Reed, M. B., Bruch, M. A., & Haase, R. F. (2004). Five-factor model of personality
and career exploration. Journal of Career Assessment, 12, 223–238. doi:10.1177
/1069072703261524
Roberts, B. W. (1997). Plaster or plasticity: Are adult work experiences associated
with personality change in women? Journal of Personality, 65(2), 205–232.
Roberts, B. W., Caspi, A., & Mofﬁtt, T. E. (2003). Work experiences and personality
development in young adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84,
582–593.
Roberts, B. W., & Del Vecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality
traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal studies.
Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. R. (2007). The
power of personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic
status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 2(4), 313–345.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level
change in personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132(1), 1–25.
Rogers, M. E., & Creed, P. A. (2011). A longitudinal examination of adolescent
career planning and exploration using a social cognitive career theory framework.
Journal of Adolescence, 34(1), 163–172. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2009.12.010
Rogers, M. E., Creed, P. A., & Ian Glendon, A. (2008). The role of personality in
adolescent career planning and exploration: A social cognitive perspective. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 73(1), 132–142. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2008.02.002
Rottinghaus, P. J., Lindley, L. D., Green, M. A., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Educational
aspirations: The contribution of personality, self-efﬁcacy, and interests. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 61(1), 1–19.
Rotundo, M., & Sackett, P. R. (2002). The relative importance of task, citizenship,
and counterproductive performance to global ratings of job performance: A
policy-capturing analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 66–80.
Salami, S. O. (2008). Roles of personality, vocational interests, academic achievement
and socio-cultural factors in educational aspirations of secondary school adolescents in southwestern Nigeria. Career Development International, 13(7), 630–647.
doi:10.1108/13620430810911092
Salgado, J. F. (1997). The ﬁve factor model of personality and job performance in the
European community. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 30–43.
Saunders, D. E., Peterson, G. W., Sampson, J. P., Jr., & Reardon, R. C. (2000). Relation
of depression and dysfunctional career thinking to career indecision. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 56(2), 288–298. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1999.1715
Schaub, M., & Tokar, D. M. (2005). The role of personality and learning experiences
in social cognitive career theory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66(2), 304–325.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.09.005
Schoon, I., & Parsons, S. (2002). Teenage aspirations for future careers and occupational outcomes. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 60, 262–288.

328

Career Development and Counseling

Schyns, B., & von Collani, G. (2002). A new occupational self-efﬁcacy scale
and its relation to personality constructs and organizational variables. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 11(2), 219–241. doi:10.1080
/13594320244000148
Skorikov, V. B., & Vondracek, F. W. (2007). Vocational identity. In B. Skorikov &
W. Patton (Eds.), Career development in childhood and adolescence (pp. 143–168).
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense.
Spurk, D., & Abele, A. E. (2011). Who earns more and why? A multiple mediation
model from personality to salary. Journal of Business and Psychology, 26(1), 87–103.
doi:10.1007/s10869-010-9184-3.
Sullivan, B. A., & Hansen, J. C. (2004). Mapping the associations between interests
and personality: Toward a conceptual understanding of individual differences in
vocational behavior. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51, 287–298.
Suls, J., & Martin, R. (2005). The daily life of the garden-variety neurotic: Reactivity,
stressor exposure, mood spill-over, and maladaptive coping. Journal of Personality,
73, 1485–1509.
Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. (1998). Helping and extra-role behaviors: Evidence of
construct and predictive validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 108–119.
Wang, N., Jome, L.-M., Haase, R.-F., & Bruch, M.-A. (2006). The role of personality and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy in the career choice commitment
of college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 14(3), 312–332. doi:10.1177
/1069072706286474
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1997). Extraversion and its positive emotional core. In
R. Hogan, J. A. Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology
(pp. 767–793). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a consensual structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 219–235.
Whiston, S. C., Brecheisen, B. K., & Stephens, J. (2003). Does treatment modality
affect career counseling effectiveness? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 150–165.
Zikic, J., & Hall, D. T. (2009). Toward a more complex view of career exploration.
Career Development Quarterly, 58(2), 181–191.

C H A P T E R 12

Relational Inﬂuences on Career
Development
MAUREEN E. KENNY AND MARY BETH MEDVIDE

R

of relationships in career development
theory and practice is expanding in the literature (Blustein, 2011).
Traditionally, career development was conceptualized as an individual process, largely independent of the vast array of relationships that
are integral to our lives. Super’s (1957) notion that optimal career choice
involves the implementation of the self-concept grew out of the American
ethos of individual autonomy and choice.
Over the past three decades, several theoretical perspectives have given
attention to the role of contextual factors, including environmental supports
and barriers, in career development. Super’s original stage theory (1957) was
broadened to encompass the life-space, recognizing the overlap between
career and relational contexts (Super, 1980; see Hartung, Chapter 4, this
volume). Social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, & Hackett,
2000; see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume) focuses heavily on the role of contextual factors in the development of vocational interests, career decision
making, and satisfaction with career choices. Support from family, peers,
teachers, and other adults in school and community settings, for example, is
conceptualized as environmental supports, which bolster the development
of self-efﬁcacy beliefs and positive outcome expectations and the transformation of interests into goals and actions. Developmental contextual
metatheory has also been applied to understanding the career development
process (Vondracek, Lerner, & Schulenberg, 1986). According to this framework, individual development takes place within the context of multiple
interacting spheres of inﬂuence at the proximal and distal levels of the social
context. Family, peers, teachers, and other signiﬁcant persons represent
ECOGNITION OF THE IMPORTANCE

329

330

Career Development and Counseling

important inﬂuences at the proximal level, which are inevitably impacted
by more distal inﬂuences exerted through the social, political, and economic
contexts.
Recent theoretical work, including relational cultural theory (Schultheiss,
2003), career construction theory (Savickas, 2005; see Savickas, Chapter 6,
this volume), and psychology of working (Blustein, 2006), has conceptualized relationships as essential to the fabric of work and life. These scholars
(Blustein, 2006; Savickas, 2005) have critiqued traditional theories for assuming a level of autonomy and life choice that is not experienced by many
persons, especially those in positions of diminished economic and political
power, across the United States and the globe. The need for social connection is recognized, however, as central to the lives of all people and can be
found through work experiences (Blustein, 2011). Social connections can take
positive and negative forms, with social support, in its varied dimensions,
offering positive connection. Social support is multifaceted and includes providing a sense of belonging or social integration; bolstering self-esteem or
conﬁdence through emotional support; setting expectations; offering speciﬁc
advice, guidance, or knowledge through information support; and lending
tangible assistance, such as ﬁnancial support, child care, or transportation
(Kenny et al., 2007; Schultheiss, Kress, Manzi, & Glasscock, 2001). Relationships can also provide access to what has long been referred to as social
capital—the system of privileged social connections and associated knowledge that is needed to effectively negotiate and advance through society
(Coleman, 1990).
This chapter examines theory and research on the role of relationships
in the career development process. We review existing research, identify
strengths and limitations of current knowledge, and discuss implications
for career development interventions at the individual, family, school, and
broader contextual levels. Although proximal relationships, including family, peers, and mentors, have garnered the most attention in the career
development literature (Richardson, 2012), distal social structures and culture inevitably shape proximal relationships and exert indirect and direct
effects on career development pathways and outcomes (Schultheiss, 2003).
Relationships cannot be accurately understood outside of the social and cultural contexts in which they are embedded (Schultheiss, 2006). Therefore, our
discussion of proximal relationships includes references to a broad array of
social and cultural factors. In describing research ﬁndings, we identify, when
reported in the research, sample characteristics, such as gender, social class,
sexual orientation, race, and ethnicity, that interplay with broader contextual
inﬂuences. We discuss relationships both as facilitators and hindrances to
career development across the life span. Although relationships can offer
protective functions in the context of economic and psychological distress,

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

331

they can also present barriers and add to life stress when they are negative or
conﬂictual (Kenny et al., 2007). Because the literature is relatively distinct by
age range, we begin with a discussion of childhood and adolescence through
college age and then move to a discussion of adulthood.
RELATIONAL INFLUENCES FROM CHILDHOOD THROUGH
YOUNG ADULTHOOD
Among children and adolescents, the inﬂuence of proximal relationships,
including family, peers, and teachers, has been examined in relation to
varied indices of career progress. Adults in the family, community, and
school offer varied types of social support and serve as role models for
academic and career attainment (Kenny, Blustein, Chaves, Grossman, &
Gallagher, 2003). To the extent that academic success is a precursor to
career development (Lapan, 2004), the important roles of family, peers, and
teachers in school achievement are also relevant to understanding career
development. Although signiﬁcant attention has been given to the role of
relational factors in the development of educational and career aspirations
(e.g., Kenny & Bledsoe, 2005), recent research suggests that aspirations are
now high among most youth in the United States, although the prerequisite
academic skills and knowledge of the educational and career pathways for
realizing these aspirations may be lacking (Kenny & Walsh-Blair, 2012).
Consequently, literature relevant to enhancing the career options, choices,
and attainment of young people draws from the work of scholars in education
and developmental and counseling psychology.
Following the work of Roe (1957) and Super (1957, 1980), scholars and
clinicians have long recognized that interests in career and work start at a
young age. Indeed, developing meaningful relationships with family and
other adult role models was identiﬁed by Super (1980) as a key developmental task of childhood, with important consequences for fostering career
awareness. Although research on the career development of elementary
school children remains sparse (Schultheiss, Palma, & Manzi, 2005), existing
scholarly work reveals that children’s social and academic experiences as
early as ﬁrst grade can mark a trajectory that inﬂuences school engagement,
academic progress, and ultimately career choice and attainment (Entwisle,
Alexander, & Olson, 2005). Howard and Walsh (2010) found that elementary school children beneﬁt from developmentally appropriate discussions
about academic achievement and career attainment, suggesting the need
to enhance relational factors that impact academic and career development
before school disengagement emerges (Lapan, 2004).
Career development across the adolescent years is of great consequence
because educational and social decisions made at this age can have lasting

332

Career Development and Counseling

effects on opportunities for academic and career advancement (Perry, Liu, &
Pabian, 2010). Unfortunately, the adolescent years are a period of declining
school engagement for some youth, leading to school dropout in ninth grade
for the most disengaged (Balfanz, Herzog, & MacIver, 2007). These who
leave school lack the requisite skills and training needed for entry into
well-paid employment and earn substantially less over their lifetimes than
peers who successfully complete postsecondary education (Kenny & WalshBlair, 2012). Research has found that students who recognize the importance
of school for their vocational futures are likely to engage in school and
achieve academically (Kenny et al., 2007). In light of the ﬁnancial, social, and
emotional costs of school disengagement, researchers have given attention to
the varied sources of social support associated with academic achievement
across the school years and into postsecondary education or the workforce
(Kenny et al., 2003; Kenny & Walsh-Blair, 2012).
Family Relationships
Review of the career development literature across the child and adolescent
years identiﬁes family as a consistent, yet modestly signiﬁcant, factor in
academic achievement and career development (Keller & Whiston, 2008).
Hargrove, Creagh, and Burgess (2002), for example, found among an ethnically diverse group of college students that perceived family support
for school and work achievement had a small but signiﬁcant relationship
with involvement in career planning. The modest effect of family suggests
that a range of individual and contextual factors, both proximal and distal,
add to and interact with family factors in inﬂuencing academic and career
development outcomes (Kenny et al., 2003).
A number of theoretical models, including Bowlby’s (1982) construct of
attachment, have been applied in understanding the mechanisms through
which families inﬂuence academic and career development. A number of
studies among high school and college students in the United States (e.g.,
Blustein, Prezioso, & Schultheiss, 1995; Kenny & Rice, 1995) and international settings (e.g., Emmanuelle, 2009; Vignoli, Croity-Belz, Chapeland, de
Fillipis, & Garcia, 2005) support the theoretical premise that secure attachment fosters career exploration, thereby advancing career maturity and the
formation of a vocational identity. Attachment theory highlights the capacity of adaptive relationships to offer a secure base of emotional support
that facilitates growth in autonomy and individual identity (Kenny & Rice,
1995). Wright and Perrone (2008) theorize, additionally, that the quality of
internalized working models of attachment developed in early experiences
impact individuals’ levels of self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations, which,
according to SCCT, are central in career development (Lent et al., 2000).

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

333

Although much research focuses on predominantly White, afﬂuent samples
(Keller & Whiston, 2008), Kenny, Gallagher, Alvarez-Salvat, and Silsby (2002)
found that secure attachment was positively related to academic grade point
average among a multiethnic sample of urban high school students from
low-income families.
The construct of social support has also been highlighted as a mechanism
by which parents and other family members inﬂuence the academic achievement and career development of youth, including the formation of career
interests, career planning, decision making, and the value placed on work
roles. Keller and Whiston (2008) described two forms of support provided by
parents with regard to career development: constructive, pragmatic support
related to career planning and more general support, such as encouragement
and praise. Among middle school students in urban and rural areas of the
Midwest, instrumental and relational supports were associated with student career decision-making self-efﬁcacy, although parent encouragement
and praise was a stronger predictor than career-focused support (Keller &
Whiston, 2008). Among racial and ethnic minority adolescents, perceived
relational support from family members has been positively associated with
school engagement, educational and career planning, and student comfort
and certainty regarding their career choices (e.g., Perry et al., 2010). Diemer
(2007) analyzed longitudinal data from the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS) following poor youth of color for 2 years after high
school graduation and found that instrumental and relational support from
parents was associated with the view that work is an important aspect of
one’s future. Diemer and colleagues (2010) found, furthermore, that parental
instrumental and relational support was positively associated with career
expectations when accompanied by discussions of how discrimination and
racism may impact future academic and career attainment. This suggests
that the beneﬁts of parental support to career development among racial and
ethnic minority adolescents might be enhanced when parents also provide a
space to discuss inequality and ways to cope with injustices.
Parent expectations, academic interests, attitudes, and school involvement
have also been related to the academic and career outcomes of their children. In a study of working and middle-class White families, Dotterer,
McHale, and Crouter (2009) found that parental interest in academic subjects
and their positive expectations about education were associated with academic achievement in middle childhood through adolescence. Research with
low-income urban adolescents has suggested that family attitudes and expectations may also inﬂuence children’s career aspirations and engagement in
goal-directed behaviors (Kenny et al., 2007). Hill and Tyson (2009) examined
50 studies and found that parent efforts to help their early adolescent children
understand the relationships between school and their future aspirations for

334

Career Development and Counseling

work were more strongly related to their academic performance than was
direct help with homework.
As children grow older, parents’ capacity or willingness to be involved
in school may decline if they are unfamiliar with the subject areas or lack
the skills needed to provide help (Keller & Whiston, 2008). Bartel (2010)
found that African American parents living in poverty wanted to provide
relational, instrumental, and ﬁnancial support for their children but were
limited by their own educational status and contextual barriers, such as
working full-time, being in limited contact with their child’s teacher, and
having few opportunities to be involved in school events. Income and
social class of family of origin have been linked across a large body of
research with academic and career attainment (Diemer, 2007), with recent
scholarship seeking to elucidate the mechanisms that explain and buffer
these effects. For example, families of ﬁrst-generation college students may
lack the social capital and ﬁnancial resources enjoyed by college-educated
families that pay for college visits and SAT preparation. Nevertheless, family
support and encouragement can be instrumental in whether low-income and
ﬁrst-generation students do attend college (Tierney & Auerbach, 2005).
Whereas family support has generally positive effects, some parents may
become overinvolved and interfering, which can have negative effects on
academic and career development. This notion is consistent with family
systems theory, which speciﬁes enmeshment as a dysfunctional pattern of
family interaction (Minuchin, 1974), and with attachment theory, which
speciﬁes optimal attachment behavior as promoting autonomy and offering
support as needed (Kenny & Rice, 1995). A study of German high school
students revealed that while parental support was positively related with
career exploration, both parental disengagement and interference were associated with career decision-making difﬁculties (Dietrich & Kracke, 2009). The
concept of the helicopter parent popularized by the media also emphasizes
the ways in which overinvolved parents, primarily from middle and upper
social classes, can stiﬂe the development of their adolescent and young adult
offspring. Among low-income families in the United States, the phenomenon
of the helicopter parent is rare (Wartman & Savage, 2008).
Research on family inﬂuence has been limited by an overemphasis on
mothers and traditional nuclear families. Although mother–child dyads
have been the focus of most studies, research suggests that support and
guidance from father ﬁgures are also crucial in career development of youth
(Keller & Whiston, 2008). Beyond the nuclear family, extended family and
community members can also be important sources of support, especially
among youth of color who may beneﬁt from added support in confronting the
effects of racism and discrimination on career progress (Kenny et al., 2003). In
efforts to encourage research that assesses the inﬂuence of extended family

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

335

on career development, Fouad and colleagues (2010) developed a measure
of family inﬂuence in career decision making that assesses informational and
ﬁnancial support from family, as well as family expectations, values, and
beliefs, and is intended to be relevant across all family structures. Preliminary
research with a socioeconomically diverse sample of college and technical
school students revealed signiﬁcant relationships between family inﬂuence
and career decision-making style, self-efﬁcacy, and adaptability (Kies, Fouad,
Liu, & Figueiredo, 2011). For career counselors, this measure has potential
for use with clients in exploring the interrelationships of family support,
values, and expectations with career decision making.
Despite the limitations of existing research, the importance of family
in academic and career development cannot be disputed. Family interest,
expectations, and involvement in their children’s academic development
are consistently associated with school and career attainment. Research
is needed, however, to more clearly delineate which parenting behaviors
impact which speciﬁc aspects of career development and to understand
variations by culture and social class.
Families are a source of both emotional and instrumental support, although
parental capacity to offer guidance concerning speciﬁc academic and career
goals may vary, based on parent education and experience (Perna et al.,
2008). When families have less access to social capital related to academic
and career development, this type of support may be accessed from other
caring adults in school and community settings.
Teacher Relationships
Given that education occurs in the school setting, it is not surprising that
perceived support and guidance from teachers on academic and social
issues is consistently associated with academic motivation, achievement, and
school engagement. In elementary school, children who perceive positive
support from teachers are likely to engage in positive classroom interactions,
demonstrate motivation and persistence in completing tasks, and develop
mastery-oriented goals (Wentzel, Battle, Russell, & Loony, 2010). Although
support is also crucial across adolescence, secondary school students are
typically taught by a group of teachers, which can make it difﬁcult to
form close student–teacher relationships (Danielsen, Wiium, Wilhelmsen, &
Wold, 2010).
Although teacher inﬂuence has been studied most in relation to academic
outcomes, teacher support also beneﬁts career development outcomes for
students. Perceived teacher support, including teacher investment in helping
students to be successful, positive regard and caring toward students,
high expectations for educational success, and accessibility as a source

336

Career Development and Counseling

of support and career information, has been positively related to career
decision making self-efﬁcacy and vocational outcome expectations among
European American high school seniors attending an urban public high
school in the Midwest (Metheny, McWhirter, & O’Neil, 2008). By creating an
accepting class environment, showing care for students, setting expectations,
and offering guidance, teachers can also facilitate career planning and
adaptability and foster positive achievement-related beliefs and hope for the
future among low-income students of color (Kenny & Bledsoe, 2005; Kenny,
Walsh-Blair, Blustein, Bempechat, & Seltzer, 2010).
Teacher–student interactions are not always positive and can have negative effects on student academic and social development beginning in the
early grades. This is unfortunate, as student work-readiness skills, including
social competence, positive work habits, and personal management skills,
are learned at school, as well as among family and peers (Lapan, 2004).
Mercer and DeRosier (2008) found that teacher disapproval of students in
third grade was associated with peer rejection, low academic performance,
and reported symptoms of depression across the elementary school years.
At the high school level, Bae, Holloway, Li, and Bempechat (2008) found that
Mexican American students, especially those who were not high academic
achievers, began to disengage from school when they perceived that teacher
expectations for their classroom behavior and performance were low.
Research has also focused on how the ethnic and racial attitudes of teachers
relate to their expectations of students and of themselves as teachers. Cammarota (2004), for example, found that teacher misperceptions about Latino
culture negatively impacted student–teacher relationships and undermined
teacher expectations for student success. As a result, Latino high school
students felt isolated in their school and disengaged as a way to cope
with negative experiences. Research by Ferguson (2003) revealed further
that teachers who held stereotypical views of economically disadvantaged
African American students did not hold themselves responsible for their
students’ academic progress.
Teachers have a signiﬁcant impact across the school years in facilitating or
hampering academic and career development through their level of student
support, their racial attitudes, and their beliefs and expectations of speciﬁc
students or student groups. Because of their focus on academic instruction,
the role of teachers in academic attainment is more robust than for career
guidance, which appears to be small yet signiﬁcant (Metheny et al., 2008).
Research suggests that the relationship between support from parents and
teachers on adolescents’ attitudes about school and planning for the future is
complex. In a study of urban high school youth, Kenny and Bledsoe (2005),
for example, found that support from teachers was a stronger predictor
of students’ school attitudes than parent support, but that parent support

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

337

was a stronger predictor of student career outcome expectations. Perry
and colleagues (2010) found among a diverse sample of urban youth that
both parent and teacher support contributed to student career planning
and decision-making self-efﬁcacy, which in turn explained student school
engagement. In efforts to more fully understand the relative value of family
and teachers in school and career planning, further research is needed to
examine the mechanisms by which both teachers and families inﬂuence
career development across race, culture, and social class.
Peer Relationships
In addition to family members, peers represent an important and oftenstudied relational inﬂuence across childhood and adolescence. Peers have
been found to be inﬂuential in the classroom setting, where classmate acceptance is associated with a positive academic self-concept (Flook, Repetti, &
Ullman, 2005). During adolescence, youth spend increasing amounts of time
with peers and look to them for advice and guidance (Flook et al., 2005).
When peers say positive things about school and value academic success,
adolescents are likely to internalize these attitudes and identify positively
with school (Kenny & Bledsoe, 2005).
Considerable attention has also been given to the negative effects of peer
relationships. Youth who lack supportive peer relationships appear to be
at risk both academically and emotionally. For example, low-income Latino
middle school students who perceive little support from classmates were
found to report negative school attitudes and symptoms of psychological
distress, which persisted as they transitioned into high school (Demaray,
Malecki, Davidson, Hodgson, & Rebus, 2005). In research among low-income
urban high school students, Kenny and colleagues (2007) found that although
most students identiﬁed friends who support them in doing well in school
and preparing for their future vocational lives, they also describe peers with
negative school attitudes as barriers to their own academic progress. Some
research (e.g., Fordham & Ogbu, 1986) suggests that low-income minority
youth are particularly likely to be surrounded by peers who devalue school
and associate doing well with ‘‘acting White.’’ Other ﬁndings suggest that
peer norms across racial and ethnic groups in the United States associate
school success with being a ‘‘nerd’’ (Tyson, Darity, & Castellino, 2005).
Because ‘‘having the right friends’’ can be important for academic success
and for career planning (Kenny et al., 2007), establishing those types of
friendships can be a crucial challenge.
Overall, a limited body of research has examined the role of peer relationships on career development. When social, behavioral, and academic
development are recognized as integral to career preparation, the importance

338

Career Development and Counseling

of peers is substantial. Adolescents describe their peers as both supports and
barriers for educational and career development. Although friends are rarely
cited as a source of speciﬁc career guidance, they can be highly inﬂuential as
sources of emotional support and in shaping attitudes and behavior toward
school and career (Kenny et al., 2007).
Mentoring Relationships
Research has found that the presence of a mentor, typically identiﬁed as a
supportive nonparental adult, can play a signiﬁcant role in fostering positive psychosocial development and academic progress (Herrera, Grossman,
Kauh, & McMaken, 2011). Mentors can be formed naturally with caring
adults in the school, community, workplace, or other settings or can be
established through formal mentoring programs. Hanlon, Simon, O’Grady,
Carswell, and Callaman (2009) found that middle school African American
students who were matched to an adult through a school-based mentoring
program earned higher grades and better ratings from teachers than counterparts who did not participate in the program. Similarly, the presence of
natural mentoring relationships with adults and older peers in the school
and the community has been associated with greater school engagement,
positive academic expectations, and a sense of belonging in the school
among Latino high school students (Sanchez, Esparza, & Colon, 2008). Adult
mentors in the workplace are considered an important element of successful
work experience for adolescents but have been largely neglected in research
(Zimmer-Gembeck & Mortimer, 2006). Kenny and colleagues (2010), however, found among ethnically diverse high school students that perceived
support and autonomy from mentors in work-based learning programs were
related to positive student attitudes toward school and career planning.
Mentoring has also been studied among college undergraduates, with an
emphasis on college persistence among students of color. Campbell and
Campbell (2007) found that racial and ethnic minority students who were
matched with a faculty mentor earned higher GPAs, completed more classes,
and were more likely to return to college the following year. College women
planning to enter male-dominated ﬁelds, such as science and engineering,
may also beneﬁt from academic and career mentoring (Liang, Spencer,
Brogan, & Corral, 2008).
Relational Violence Among Youth
With regard to the potential negative impact of relationships, many youth
are exposed to interpersonal violence in the home or in the community, with
negative repercussions for academic achievement. The effects of domestic

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

339

violence and childhood abuse have been studied, with research indicating
that witnessing or experiencing violence in the home is related to negative
mental health, psychosocial, and academic outcomes (Thompson & Whimper, 2010). In addition to violence within the family, youth may be exposed
to violence in the community or school, which can lead to ongoing and
residual effects that interfere with academic achievement (Holt, Finkelhor, &
Kaufman Kantor, 2007). Peer bullying has negative academic and psychosocial effects for both victims and perpetrators (Nakamoto & Schwartz,
2010). As a result of increased awareness of the academic and psychological
costs of bullying, school laws regarding bullying have been strengthened in
some states.
Implications for Practice With Children and Adolescents
In work with children and adolescents, intervention is often carried out
within school settings to promote academic development, career progress,
and work readiness behaviors (Lapan, 2004). In recognition of the relation of
emotional support among youth to a variety of important social, psychological, academic, and career outcomes, interventions should strive to promote
positive and supportive relationships with adults in the home, school, workplace, and community. This entails a broad view of educational and career
counseling, which deﬁnes the counselor role, consistent with the national
model of the American School Counselor Association (2005), as inﬂuencing
factors that shape school culture and climate and advocating for underserved
youth who are at risk for academic and psychological difﬁculties.
Because all relationships are embedded in a social and cultural context,
counselors and educators who seek to enhance supportive relationships must
do so with awareness and sensitivity to the diversity in their community.
Seeking to promote teacher and counselor sensitivity and responsiveness
to students across race, ethnicity, social class, and sexual orientation can be
important in fostering positive relationships. Research afﬁrms that diverse
youth often experience feelings of alienation in the school and community
when signiﬁcant adults communicate disinterest or disregard for them and
their futures (Cammarota, 2004). Counselors need to be attentive to the
overall school climate, which includes reducing discrimination and bullying
as practiced by students and faculty (Kenny & Walsh-Blair, 2012). Among
students, attention should be directed toward building a culture of personal
respect and high expectations for academic and vocational achievement.
Such efforts are needed to protect youth from those negative peers who
serve as a distraction from educational and career goals (Kenny et al., 2007).
Counselors and teachers are a primary conduit for information and guidance regarding future educational and vocational opportunities and play

340

Career Development and Counseling

a critical role in communicating expectations and vocational hope for the
future to youth and their families. Counselors can bolster the capacity of
families to use their cultural strengths in support of the academic and career
development of their young people. In addition, quality college counseling
that begins at the middle school level can help to make students and their
families aware of the coursework needed for college entry and success and
assist students and their families in the college application and ﬁnancial
aid process (Perna et al., 2008). Outreach to families, employers, and other
community members can increase access for youth across social class and
ethnic backgrounds to career guidance and support, including awareness of
higher education pathways and professional work opportunities. Mentors
in community and work-based learning sites can be inﬂuential in offering
emotional support and speciﬁc career and educational guidance for young
people and their families.
Research highlighting the importance of adult support has been incorporated in some educational reform and career planning efforts. Career
academies, for example, have demonstrated positive results in enhancing
academic achievement and reducing school dropout among those youth most
vulnerable to leaving school (Kemple, 2008). Although career academies vary
in their speciﬁc theme and structure, all are designed to integrate academic
and vocational coursework around a career theme and to increase feelings of
school belonging by arranging for students and teachers in the same career
theme area to have several classes together each day (Hooker & Brand, 2009).
In addition, some schools have sought to increase teacher–student interaction by structuring advisory sessions, which increase teacher involvement
in student mentoring and guidance and help teachers interact with the
students they teach on a more personal level. The Career Institute, a public
school in New York City, was designed to foster academic attainment and
develop career competencies among academically at-risk students by integrating academic and career development programming across the middle
school and high school years (Rivera & Schaefer, 2009). The curriculum is
designed jointly by teachers and school counselors, and students work with
the same teacher in advisory sessions over 7 years of school, allowing close
and supportive relationships to develop among students and school faculty.
Preliminary evaluation of the advisory model suggests promising results
(Fleischman & Heppen, 2009).
In individual and group work with youth, career counselors need to attend
to the interrelationships among the academic, social, psychological, and vocational domains of development, recognizing how social and psychological
factors impact academic attainment and career choice. Career guidance can
assist youth in exploring how peers, teachers, and family have impacted educational and career development, and in identifying strategies and resources

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

341

for accessing additional sources of emotional and instrumental support. The
Choices Program (Vera et al., 2007) was designed as a culturally relevant
and responsive classroom intervention for Latino youth and includes units
that examine social barriers to academic and career progress and build student efﬁcacy in responding adaptively to peer pressure. Jackson, Kacanski,
Rust, and Beck (2006) developed workshops for low-income urban Black
and Latino eighth- and ninth-grade students to increase awareness of the
personal and contextual supports that can be used to reach their school
and career goals. Short-term evaluation revealed that this intervention was
successful in increasing student awareness of relational supports, although
the longer-term impact of this change was not assessed.
ADULT CAREER DEVELOPMENT IN A RELATIONAL CONTEXT
For adults, work and relationships are conceptualized as interfacing in
numerous ways. Richardson (2012), for example, describes how personal
relationships, relationships in the workplace (i.e., market work), caregiving relationships (i.e., care work), and the demands of market work and
care work interrelate and ultimately inﬂuence both personal and vocational
decisions. Blustein (2011) explains that work is an important site for meaningful social relationships, that relationships can give meaning and purpose
to work, and that relationships both at the work site and in the personal
arena can help persons cope with work-based challenges. The social connection offered through work can also be devastated when employment
is lost, which is unfortunately a frequent event during times of economic
distress. At the same time, relationships from multiple sources may be
turned to for support in coping with unemployment or as a source of gratiﬁcation for persons who invest their energies in unpaid work in caring
for others.
Globalization, advances in technology, and increasing job instability are
radically impacting the workforce in the United States and across the globe
(Blustein, 2006). As a consequence, the traditional linear career trajectory
has been replaced by the protean career, characterized by numerous job
changes, nonlinear progressions, and more frequent periods of unemployment. In this work landscape, tensions among career interests, goals, and
external realities increase, and relational support and social emotional skills
become increasingly important for career decision making and advancement
(Di Fabio & Kenny, 2012). The 21st-century workplace values communication, collaboration, and team building, as well as innovation and problem
solving (Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2008). Across the protean
career, personal identity and satisfaction are derived from relational fulﬁllment as well as from individual achievement. Taken as a whole, an

342

Career Development and Counseling

inclusive understanding of the work lives of individuals is emerging that
recognizes the varied and dynamic roles of relationships in both paid and
unpaid labor.
Our review of existing research highlights a variety of intersections
between relationships and work across adult life. Relevant literature draws
from sociology, marriage and family counseling, industrial psychology,
and occupational health psychology. Vocational choices, adjustment, and
advances in the world of work are also widely understood as a product
of individual and contextual factors. Workplace mentors, along with organizational and broader social policies, inevitably impact career attainment.
Whereas much research has focused on the positive aspects of workplace
relationships, such as mentoring, the effects of negative workplace relationships, such as discrimination and bullying, also deserve attention. We begin
with a discussion of the work–family interface, which has been a focus of
extensive study, and then consider domestic violence and different types of
workplace relationships.
Work–Family Interface
As the number of women in the labor market increased across the late 20th
and into the 21st century, there was a surge of research on the relationship
between work and family (Schultheiss, 2003). Super’s (1957) original theory
was revised to consider how multiple roles across vocational and personal
domains can converge to foster a healthy vocational identity and a high
quality of life (Super, 1980). Consistent with this notion, occupational health
research indicates that psychological well-being often improves as people
take on multiple roles across life domains (van Steenbergen, Ellemers, &
Mooijaart, 2007). This positive spillover across life roles can lead to enhanced
work performance, increased organizational commitment, and higher levels
of satisfaction in the workplace (Grzywacz & Marks, 2000), as well as
increased commitment to home responsibilities and higher levels of family
satisfaction (van Steenbergen et al., 2007).
Although this research suggests that family and work obligations can
be successfully combined and enhance one another, research also suggests
that individuals do not always have enough time, energy, or resources to
function successfully across all life roles (Grzywacz & Marks, 2000). In these
circumstances, job satisfaction and commitment to work may decline, and
burnout may increase (Amstad, Meier, Fasel, Elfering, & Semmer, 2011).
Conﬂict between the demands of work and family can also contribute to
marital discord, family dissatisfaction (van Steenbergen et al., 2007), and
psychological distress (Amstad et al., 2011).
Research has also examined gender differences in the beneﬁts and challenges of balancing work and family. Work–family conﬂict and stress, for

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

343

example, may be greater for women when they take on more household
and familial responsibilities than their male partners. This can lead to family
stress and negatively impact work productivity (van Steenbergen et al., 2007).
There is some indication that a more egalitarian division of responsibilities
has emerged among U.S. couples (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011), and ﬁndings related to gender differences in work–family conﬂict may be changing
as a result. Nevertheless, data suggest that women remain more likely than
their male partners to change their career paths and to forgo workplace
opportunities because of family responsibilities (Schultheiss, 2009).
Career development research has typically focused on married heterosexual couples with children; the applicability of this research to other
family constellations, such as single parents, unmarried couples, extended
kin networks, and same-sex partners is, therefore, unclear. Consequently,
Schultheiss (2003) has argued for increased attention to other family types
that may have unique needs arising from a variety of socially constructed
barriers in the school, community, and workplace, such as prejudice and
discrimination. Several authors (Schultheiss, 2009; Richardson, 2012) have
also critiqued theory and research on the work–family interface for valuing
paid market work over unpaid care work, such as caring for children, aging
parents, and other loved ones. Work is traditionally understood in relation to economic productivity, with caregiving conceptualized as a family
responsibility that can interfere with paid responsibilities in the workplace
(Schultheiss, 2009). Richardson (2012) maintains that caregiving should be
given equal respect in relation to work in the public domain and recognized
as a form of work practice and career choice. However, this viewpoint has
not been fully embraced in scholarship or career counseling practice.
Domestic Violence
Domestic and other types of interpersonal violence are examples of negative
relational qualities that can also impede career development among adults.
The barriers associated with domestic and other forms of interpersonal
violence can interface with career barriers related to gender, poverty, and
minority status. Women are four times more likely than men to be victims of
intimate partner violence (United States Department of Justice, 2011). Those
women living in households making under $7,500 per year are 6 times more
likely than women in households with an annual income above $50,000 to
experience domestic violence (Catalano, 2006).
Career interventions can be beneﬁcial in helping survivors of domestic
violence to develop the vocational skills needed to leave an abusive relationship, enter the workforce, and gain ﬁnancial independence (Chronister &
McWhirter, 2006). In addition to vocational skills, effective career interventions often focus on building support networks with friends and family that

344

Career Development and Counseling

can foster self-efﬁcacy about work abilities and enhance optimism about the
future (Chronister et al., 2009). A burgeoning line of research (Chronister
et al., 2009; Chronister & McWhirter, 2006) focuses on working with domestic
violence survivors to develop a critical perspective on oppression in their
lives related to race, social class, and gender (Chronister & McWhirter, 2006).
This approach has the potential to augment traditional career interventions
by reducing self-blame among survivors of domestic violence. A study by
Chronister and McWhirter (2006) found that women who participated in
an intervention that included traditional career components and discussions
on the impact of domestic violence made more progress toward their goals
than women who did not have the opportunity to discuss those experiences.
Relationships in the Workplace
Within the workplace, relationships can also have positive beneﬁts or serve as
impediments. Mentoring represents one workplace factor that can facilitate
career development; discrimination and bullying represent relational factors
that often have negative effects.
Mentoring. Applied psychology research suggests that mentoring in the
workplace is beneﬁcial for persons hoping to advance within their organizations and expand their array of vocational skills. The emotional support from
a mentoring relationship can foster self-efﬁcacy and a positive vocational
identity, which are essential for skill building and goal setting (Allen, Eby,
Poteet, Lentz, & Lima, 2004). Despite these beneﬁcial positive effects, mentoring relationships can also be characterized by negative feelings. Protégés,
for example, may criticize their mentors for inadequate support or insufﬁcient feedback, and mentors may question their protégés’ commitment to
learning (Allen et al., 2004). Mentoring relationships can also breed a sense
of entitlement among some protégés who believe they are more deserving
of preferential treatment than their peers, which can lead to resentment in
the organization toward mentors and mentees (Allen et al., 2004).
Research suggests that mentoring may be particularly important for
women, racial and ethnic minorities, and gays and lesbians, who may face
sexism, racism, homophobia, and discrimination. In addition to traditional
mentoring functions, mentoring can offer members of these marginalized
groups a safe place to discuss socially constructed barriers that limit opportunities for workplace advancement (Benishek, Bieschke, Park, & Slattery,
2004). Perceptions of prejudice and discrimination across the organization
can, however, limit workers’ willingness to seek out informal mentoring
relationships (Brenner, Lyons, & Fassinger, 2010).

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

345

Workplace discrimination. For some racial and ethnic minority workers,
relationships in the workplace can be characterized by experiences with
prejudice and discrimination. Although the federal government protects
racial minorities against overt acts of discrimination at work, subtle forms of
discrimination and prejudice persist, have negative effects, and are often difﬁcult to eradicate (King et al., 2011). Kern and Grandey (2009), for example,
found that racial minority service workers who experienced microaggressions by White customers reported increased stress levels and decreased
feelings of well-being. As deﬁned by Sue and colleagues (2007), racial
microaggressions are commonplace, hostile, or derogatory comments and
behaviors that are directed intentionally and unintentionally toward persons
of color. By analyzing 219 court cases where complaints of racial discrimination were brought against employers, King and colleagues (2011) found
that microaggressions were often dismissed by judges because of subjective interpretations of what constitutes serious harassment and difﬁculty
by the plaintiffs in demonstrating the intentionality of these acts. King and
colleagues (2011) concluded that legal deﬁnitions of discrimination make it
difﬁcult to demonstrate that experiences of microaggression are damaging
to plaintiffs’ personal and professional lives.
Experiences of workplace discrimination among gays and lesbians are
complicated by the fact that these workers may have few formal interpersonal or organizational resources to seek remediation. Currently, there is a
federal statute to protect gay and lesbian workers against workplace discrimination in the public sector, but private corporations are not legally obligated
to protect their workers from discriminatory practices (Human Rights Campaign, 2011). The effects of federal and state laws within workplaces that
do not abide by antidiscrimination policies have been a growing area of
research. Mercier (2008) found that lesbian participants’ perceptions of their
relationships with coworkers were impacted by fears of and actual experiences with discrimination and homophobic responses to self-disclosures
about partners and children. There were also ﬁnancial costs to discriminatory
work practices because partners and children were not eligible for health
care beneﬁts. Participants reported that the stress of working in a homophobic environment and the pressure to conform to heteronormative attitudes
about work and family created strain that seeped into their relationships
with partners and children.
Workplace bullying. Bullying, which is often associated with school outcomes
in children and adolescents, is also a concern for adult workers. Workplace
bullying can take the form of ongoing physical or verbal aggression or
attempts to exclude and isolate certain workers (Einarsen, 2000). Bullying

346

Career Development and Counseling

can contribute to stress and negative mental health outcomes (Rodrı́guezMuñoz, Moreno-Jiménez, Sanz Vergel, & Garrosa Hernández, 2010) and
often has negative effects on work productivity, organizational commitment,
and job satisfaction (Einarsen, 2000). Based on the results of their metaanalysis, Neilsen, Matthiesen, and Einarsen (2010) concluded that bullying
is a common and signiﬁcant problem in the workplace and suggested that it
should be addressed at individual, interpersonal, organizational, and policy
levels.
Clearly, organizations and the persons who lead them need to devise
policies that support worker satisfaction and realization of career potential.
Rhoades and Eisenberger (2002) argue that organizations with these policies
are likely to have employees who perceive their work environment to be
caring and committed to their well-being. When employees perceive little or
no organizational support, they are likely to report diminished competence
and be less productive and committed than are those who perceive sufﬁcient
organizational support (Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002).
Implications for Practice With Adults
Awareness of the critical role of social relationships across the life span and
as factors that interrelate with career development has important implications for career assessment and intervention. Although the speciﬁc ways
in which knowledge of relationships is integrated will vary based on the
counselor’s theoretical perspective, we recommend a holistic approach to
assessment and intervention that recognizes the reciprocal relationships
among the social, emotional, academic, and vocational dimensions of life. By
appreciating the numerous connections among work life and relationships
across the personal, work, and caregiving contexts, the distinctions between
psychotherapy and career counseling break down (Schultheiss, 2009). As
a result, an integrative approach that combines psychotherapy and career
counseling is advantageous (Blustein, 2011).
In working with individuals, career counselors can address the importance
and inﬂuence of relationships from a variety of theoretical perspectives.
From the life design perspective (Savickas et al., 2009), for example, a
counselor might conduct a life story interview that assists clients in exploring
their current life across vocational, familial, interpersonal, and spiritual
contexts. From the SCCT perspective (Lent et al., 2000), the counselor
might work with a client to identify relational resources and barriers in the
present, anticipate future obstacles, and develop proactive strategies that will
maximize activities and relational supports to reach work goals. A key tenet
of SCCT is that people will take action to reach goals if they believe that there
are ample supports in place and few barriers. Counselors can assist clients in

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

347

examining social networks to identify supportive family members, peers, and
work colleagues and to develop strategies for accessing relational resources
to overcome barriers. The relational cultural perspective (Schultheiss, 2003)
also includes an in-depth exploration of inﬂuential relationships. Clients
might be assisted in examining positive and negative relationships across
work, personal, and family contexts, with attention to resolving conﬂicts
across these spheres and locating and accessing alternate sources of support,
if needed. Schultheiss (2003) suggests the discussion of a difﬁcult work
situation as a tool in counseling for identifying inﬂuential relationships,
conﬂict, and support. Counselors can guide clients in exploring the interface
between work and family life and the importance of market and care work
for client life meaning, psychological well-being, and career advancement
(Schultheiss, 2006). The counseling relationship provides an immediate
source of support, through which the client can gain conﬁdence and skills for
confronting and negotiating difﬁcult relationships and building supportive
and mutually enhancing relationships.
Counselors can also work directly with clients in developing the kind of
social and emotional skills needed to engage in adaptive relationships in
the workplace and across personal life domains (Blustein, 2006). Knowing
how to access social support, negotiate conﬂict, and effectively express one’s
needs can be critical for numerous career development processes, including
career decision making, seeking employment, coping with job loss, adjusting
to and advancing in the workplace, and responding to domestic or workplace
violence, bullying, or discrimination.
As with youth, assessment and intervention should focus not only on
individuals but also on the proximal and distal social contexts in which they
are embedded. Counselors need to be aware of the ways in which local
and federal laws impact family leave policies, workplace discrimination,
and bullying. Counselors can work with clients to become more aware
of these and other sociopolitical factors that affect work relationships, job
performance, and work satisfaction. They may also strive to increase client
awareness concerning the impact of institutional policies and support and
their rights as they relate to personal and career development decisions.
Counselors might also assist clients in devising ways to effect change in the
contexts in which they are embedded, such as the family and the workplace.
Counselors can work with clients to gain skills in self and group advocacy
for changing community, organizational, and governmental policies. For
clients who experience microaggressions in the workplace, counselors might
assist them in critically examining these incidents, possible responses, and
their rights as employees (Richardson, 2012). Counseling can also empower
clients to mobilize personal and professional resources in confronting the
microaggressions and evaluating the effectiveness of change efforts.

348

Career Development and Counseling

Counselors and vocational psychologists can play a vital role in shaping
practices and policies that enhance the kinds of healthy and just relationships
that promote optimal career development for all groups. These professionals may also choose to engage in social and political advocacy to change
policies at the community, state, and federal levels that undermine healthy
relationships and restrict the career choice and advancement of disenfranchised groups. Schultheiss (2009), for example, argues that psychologists
should advocate for legislation that is more just in distributing resources to
full-time caregivers or helping caregivers who want to transition back into
market work.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Existing research reveals a complex interface among relationships in the
personal life domain, workplace relationships, and educational and career
development. Across the life span, family, friends, coworkers, supervisors,
and others interrelate in important and complex ways with career development processes. Although more research is needed to understand how
characteristics of speciﬁc relationships contribute to speciﬁc educational and
career development outcomes, career counseling practice cannot ignore both
the positive and negative impacts of relationships. Existing research provides
several broad implications for the preparation of career counselors and the
practice of career counseling and other interventions at multiple contextual
levels to support career development. More speciﬁc implications for work
with children, adolescents, and adults were discussed earlier in this chapter.
As emphasized throughout this chapter, the practice of career counseling
inevitably intersects with psychotherapy across a variety of life domains.
The interrelationship of work and relationships in paid work and care
work domains has implications for the knowledge and skills needed by the
career counselor. In addition to a command of career theory and practice,
the career counselor should have a sound grasp of theory and research
regarding the development of healthy relationships across the life span and
how the academic, social, psychological, and vocational dimensions of individual development are interrelated. In addition, knowledge of how these
developmental trajectories interface with broader contextual factors, such
as the structure of organizations, race relations, culture, gender, and social
class is vital. Career counselors should thus possess broad developmental
and contextual knowledge and exercise competence in career, personal, and
multicultural counseling.
With regard to practice, career counseling entails a focus on individuals
as well as the contexts in which they are embedded. Career counseling with
individuals and groups should attend to the roles of relational supports

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

349

and barriers in career exploration, decision making, work adjustment, career
advancement, and job loss and their relation to client psychological wellbeing. Counselors can assist clients in exploring the interface of work and
relationships, the ways in which relationships serve as resources and barriers
in navigating one’s career path, and how to best negotiate these relationships. In addition to a focus on academic and career skill development,
counseling can aid clients in developing the social and emotional skills that
will contribute to positive and successful relationships and psychological
well-being both within and outside of the workplace. Some clients may also
beneﬁt from assistance in developing skills needed for negotiating and overcoming contextual barriers they may encounter. Clients can be supported in
social change efforts as individuals or as part of a larger social action effort.
Assisting clients, such as youth living in poverty or low-income women who
are victims of domestic violence, to gain a critical understanding of the social
conditions that have contributed to their social status is an emerging area of
career counseling research and practice.
Career counselors may also strive to enhance the relational contexts that
support academic and career development. For youth, increasing the capacities of teachers and school administrators to support the academic and career
attainment for all students is important. Counselors can assist clients or signiﬁcant others in the social network, such as family, teachers, or mentors,
to gain an appreciation of how relational assets and barriers are shaped by
broader contextual factors. Following from this awareness, counselors, teachers, mentors, and employers can be guided in creating environments that
reduce oppression, including bullying and microaggressions. Counselors
who are employed by work organizations may be involved in developing
mentoring programs and other workplace policies and support systems that
foster employee work productivity, satisfaction, and career advancement.
Work and relational issues intersect for youth, couples, and families in many
ways, as we have described in this chapter. As a result, marriage and family
counselors as well as career counselors often address concerns regarding
care work and paid work, the balance of work and family responsibilities for
couples, and the impact of job stress or job loss on family interactions.
Related to their knowledge of the ways in which distal contextual factors, such as poverty, racism, classism, ageism, ableism, and heterosexism,
impact relational quality and academic and career outcomes, some career
counselors may also choose to inﬂuence social, educational, political, and
economic policy by taking on advocacy roles. Counselors can, for example,
advocate for and promote policies within the context of K-12 classrooms,
universities, workplaces, community organizations, or the society at large to
support healthy relationships and career development for all persons. Career
counselors can use their expertise in career and personal development to

350

Career Development and Counseling

inform the voting public through contributions to local print and broadcast
media or may contribute to policy briefs directed toward local and national
legislatures. Although these functions go beyond the traditional role of the
career counselor, the effect of broader social policy on relational well-being
and academic and workplace development are propelling a growing number
of counselors to engage in social and political advocacy roles.

REFERENCES
Allen, T. D., Eby, L. T., Poteet, M. L., Lentz, E., & Lima, L. (2004). Career beneﬁts associated with mentoring for protégés: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 89(1), 127–136. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.89.1.127
American School Counselor Association. (2005). The ASCA national model: A framework for school counseling programs (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: Author.
Amstad, F. T., Meier, L. L., Fasel, U., Elfering, A., & Semmer, N. K. (2011). A metaanalysis of work–family conﬂict and various outcomes with a special emphasis
on cross-domain versus matching-domain relations. Journal of Occupational Health
Psychology, 16, 151–169. doi:10.1037/a0022170
Bae, S., Holloway, S. D., Li, J., & Bempechat, J. (2008). Mexican American students’
perceptions of teacher expectations: Do perceptions differ depending on student
achievement levels? Urban Review, 40, 210–225. doi:10.1007/s11256-007-0070-x
Balfanz, R., Herzog, L., & MacIver, D. (2007). Preventing student disengagement and
keeping students on the graduation path in urban middle-grades schools: Early
identiﬁcation and effective interventions. Educational Psychologist, 42(4), 223–235.
Bartel, V. B. (2010). Home and school factors impacting parental involvement in a
Title I elementary school. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 24, 209–228.
doi:10.1080/02568543.2010.487401
Benishek, L. A., Bieschke, K. J., Park, J., & Slattery, S. M. (2004). A multicultural
feminist model of mentoring. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development,
32, 428–442. doi:2005–00106-016
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L. (2011). A relational perspective of careers and working: A social
constructionist analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79, 1–17. doi:10.1016
/j.jvb.2010.10.004
Blustein, D. L., Prezioso, M. S., & Schultheiss, D. P. (1995). Attachment theory and
career development: Current status and future directions. Counseling Psychologist,
23, 416–432. doi:1996–91454-001
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Brenner, B. R., Lyons, H. Z., & Fassinger, R. (2010). Can heterosexism harm organizations? Predicting the perceived organizational citizenship behaviors of gay and
lesbian employees. Career Development Quarterly, 28, 321–355.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). American time use survey—2010 results. Washington,
DC: Department of Labor. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/tus/data.htm

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

351

Cammarota, J. (2004), The gendered and racialized pathways of Latina and Latino
youth: Different struggles, different resistances in the urban context. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 35, 53–74. doi:10.1525/aeq.2004.35.1.53
Campbell, T. A., & Campbell, D. E. (2007). Outcomes of mentoring at-risk college students: Gender and ethnic matching effects. Mentoring & Tutoring, 15(2), 135–148.
doi:10.1080/13611260601086287
Catalano, S. (2006). Intimate partner violence in the U.S. Washington, DC: United States
Department of Justice. Retrieved from http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub
/pdf/ipvus.pdf
Chronister, K. M., Brown, C., O’Brien, K. M., Wettersten, V. B., Burt, M., &
Shahane, A. (2009). Domestic violence survivors: Perceived vocational supports and barriers. Journal of Career Assessment, 17, 116–131. doi:2009–00743
-00710.1177/1069072708325858
Chronister, K. M., & McWhirter, E. H. (2006). An experimental examination of
two career interventions for battered women. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53,
151–164. doi:2006–04241-00110.1037/0022-0167.53.2.151
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Danielsen, A. G., Wiium, N., Wilhelmsen, B. U., & Wold, B. (2010). Perceived
support provided by teachers and classmates and students’ self-reported academic initiative. Journal of School Psychology, 48, 247–267. doi:2038094910.1016/j.jsp
.2010.02.0022010-07246-00
Demaray, M. K., Malecki, C. K., Davidson, L. M., Hodgson, K. K., & Rebus,
P. J. (2005). The relationship between social support and student adjustment:
A longitudinal analysis. Psychology in the Schools, 42, 691–706. doi:2005–11036
-00210.1002/pits.20120
Di Fabio, A., & Kenny, M. E. (2012). Emotional intelligence and perceived support
among Italian high school students. Journal of Career Development, ﬁrst published
on October 5, 2011 as doi:10.1177/0894845311421005
Diemer, M. A. (2007). Parental and school inﬂuences upon the career development of youth of color. Journal of Vocational Psychology, 70, 502–524.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2007.02.003
Diemer, M. A., Wang, Q., Moore, T., Gregory, S. R., Hatcher, K. M., & Voight, A.
M. (2010). Sociopolitical development, work salience, and vocational expectations
among low socioeconomic status African American, Latin American, and Asian
American youth. Developmental Psychology, 46, 619–635. doi:0.1037/a0017049
Dietrich, J., & Kracke, B. (2009). Career-speciﬁc parental behaviors in adolescents’ development. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 75, 109–119. doi:2009–
1304900410.1016/j.jvb.2009.03.005
Dotterer, A. M., McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (2009). The development and
correlates of academic interests from childhood through adolescence. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 101, 509–519. doi:2009–04640-02110.1037/a0013987
Einarsen, S. (2000). Harassment and bullying at work: A review of the Scandinavian approach. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 4, 371–401. doi:2000–15622
-00310.1016/S1359-1789(98)00043-3

352

Career Development and Counseling

Emmanuelle, V. (2009). Inter-relationships among attachment to mother and father,
self-esteem, and career indecision. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 75, 91–99.
doi:2009–13049-00210.1016/j.jvb.2009.04.007
Entwisle, D. R., Alexander, K. L., & Olson, L. S. (2005). First grade and educational
attainment by age 22: A new story. American Journal of Sociology, 110, 1458–1502.
doi:2005-05833-00510.1086/428444
Ferguson, R. F. (2003). Teachers’ perception and expectations and the Black-White
test score gap. Urban Education, 38, 460–507. doi:10.1177/0042085903038004006
Fleischman, S., & Heppen, J. (2009). Improving low-performing high schools: Searching for evidence of promise. The Future of Children, 19, 105–133. doi:10.1353
/foc.0.0021
Flook, L., Repetti, R. L., & Ullman, J. B. (2005). Classroom social experiences
as predictors of academic performance. Developmental Psychology, 41, 319–327.
doi:2005-02477-00410.1037/0012-1649.41.2.319
Fordham, S., & Ogbu, J. (1986). Black students’ school success: Coping with the
burden of ‘‘acting White.’’ Urban Review, 18, 176–206. doi:1988–12135-001
Fouad, N. A., Cotter, E. W., Fitzpatrick, M. E., Kantamneni, N., Carter, L., & Bernfeld,
S. (2010). Development and validation of the Family Inﬂuence Scale. Journal of
Career Assessment, 18, 276–291. doi:10.1177/1069072710364793
Grzywacz, J. G., & Marks, N. F. (2000). Reconceptualizing the work–family interface:
An ecological perspective on the correlates of positive and negative spillover
between work and family. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5, 111–126.
doi:1999-15533-01010.1037//1076-8998.5.1.111
Hanlon, T. E., Simon, B. D., O’Grady, K. E., Carswell, S. B., & Callaman, J. M. (2009).
The effectiveness of an after-school program targeting urban African American youth. Education & Urban Society, 42(1), 96–118. doi:2009–20514-00510.1177
/0013124509343144
Hargrove, B. K., Creagh, M. G., & Burgess, B. L. (2002).Family interaction patterns as
predictors of vocational identity and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 61, 185–201. doi:2002–18408-00110.1006/jvbe.2001.1848
Herrera, C., Grossman, J. B., Kauh, T. J., & McMaken, J. (2011). Mentoring in
schools: An impact study of Big Brothers Big Sisters school-based mentoring.
Child Development, 82, 346–361. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01559.x
Hill, N. E., & Tyson, D. F. (2009). Parental involvement in middle school: A metaanalytic assessment of the strategies that promote achievement. Developmental
Psychology, 45, 740–763. doi:2009-05916-011
Holt, M. K., Finkelhor, D., & Kaufman Kantor, G. (2007). Multiple victimization
experiences of urban elementary school students: Associations with psychosocial
functioning and academic performance. Child Abuse and Neglect, 31, 503–515.
doi:2007–08408-00410.1016/j.chiabu.2006.12.006
Hooker, S., & Brand, B. (2009). Success at every step: How 23 programs support
youth on the path to college and beyond. Retrieved from http://www.aypf.org/wpcontent/uploads/2012/03/SuccessAtEveryStep.pdf
Howard, K., & Walsh, M. E. (2010). Conceptions of career choice and attainment:
Developmental levels in how children think about careers. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 76, 143–152. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2009.10.0102010-05279-002

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

353

Human Rights Campaign. (2011). Corporate equality index: Rating American workplaces
on lesbians, gay, bisexual, and transgendered equality. Washington, DC: Author.
Jackson, M. A., Kacanski, J. M., Rust, J. P., & Beck, S. E. (2006). Constructively
challenging diverse inner-city youth’s beliefs about educational and career
barriers and supports. Journal of Career Development, 32, 203–218. doi:10.1177
/0894845305279161
Keller, B. K., & Whiston, S. C. (2008). The role of parental inﬂuences on young adolescents’ career development. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 198–217. doi:200804718-00410.1177/1069072707313206
Kemple, J. J. (2008). Career academies: Long-term impacts on labor market outcomes,
educational attainment, and transitions to adulthood. New York, NY: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation.
Kenny, M. E., & Bledsoe, M. (2005). Contributions of the relational context to career
adaptability among urban adolescents. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 257–272.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.10.002
Kenny, M. E., Blustein, D. L., Chaves, A., Grossman, J. M., & Gallagher , L. A. (2003).
The role of perceived barriers and relational support in the educational and
vocational lives of urban high school students. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 50,
142–155. doi:2003–03644-00410.1037/0022-0167.50.2.142
Kenny, M. E., Gallagher, L. A., Alvarez-Salvat, R., & Silsby, J. (2002). Sources
of support and psychological distress among academically successful inner-city
youth. Adolescence, 37, 161–182. doi:2002-13255-011
Kenny, M. E., Gualdron, L., Scanlon, D., Sparks, E., Blustein, D., & Jernigan,
M. (2007). Urban adolescents’ construction of supports and barriers to their
educational and career attainment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 336–343.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.54.3.3362007-09249-01110.1037/0022-0167.54.3.336
Kenny, M. E., & Rice, K. G. (1995) Attachment to parents and adjustment in late adolescent college students: Current status, applications, and future considerations.
Counseling Psychologist, 23, 433–456. doi:1996–06509-001
Kenny, M. E., & Walsh-Blair, L. Y. (2012). Educational development: Applications. In
N. Fouad (Ed.), APA handbook of counseling psychology, vol. 2: Practice, interventions,
and applications (pp. 29–55). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Kenny, M. E., Walsh-Blair, L. Y., Blustein, D. L., Bempechat, J., & Seltzer, J. (2010).
Achievement motivation among urban adolescents: Work hope, autonomy support, and achievement- related beliefs. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 77, 205–212.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2010.02.005
Kern, J. H., & Grandey, A. A. (2009). Customer incivility as a social stressor: The
role of race and racial identity for service employees. Journal of Occupational Health
Psychology, 14, 46–57. doi:2008-19186-00510.1037/a0012684
Kies, A. L., Fouad, N. A., Liu, J. P., & Figueiredo, C. M. (2011). Convergent validity of
the Family-Inﬂuence Scale on Career Decision Making. Poster presented at the 119th
annual convention of the American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
King, E. B., Dunleavy, D. G., Dunleavy, E. M., Jaffer, S., Morgan, W. B., Elder,
K., & Graebner, R. (2011). Discrimination in the 21st century: Are science and
the law aligned? Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 17(1), 54–75. doi:10.1037
/a0021673

354

Career Development and Counseling

Lapan, R. (2004). Career development across the K-16 years: Bridging the present to
satisfying and successful futures. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers
to career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
36–49. doi:.2000-13659-00410.1037//0022-0167.47.1.36
Liang, B., Spencer, R., Brogan, D., & Corral, M. (2008). Mentoring relationships from
early adolescence through emerging adulthood: A qualitative analysis. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 72, 168–182. doi:2008-03620-00310.1016/j.jvb.2007.11.005
Mercer, S. H., & DeRosier, M. E. (2008). Teacher preference, peer rejection, and student aggression: A prospective study of transactional inﬂuence and independent
contributions to emotional adjustment and grades. Journal of School Psychology,
46(6), 661–685. doi:2008-15618-00510.1016/j.jsp.2008.06.006
Mercier, L. R. (2008). Lesbian parents and work: Stressors and supports for the
work–family interface. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Social Services: Issues in Practice,
Policy, & Research, 19, 25–47. doi:10.1080/10538720802131675
Metheny, J., McWhirter, E. H., & O’Neil, M. E. (2008). Measuring perceived teacher
support and its inﬂuence on adolescent career development. Journal of Career
Assessment, 16, 218–237. doi:2008–04718-00510.1177/1069072707313198
Minuchin, S. (1974). Families and family therapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Nakamoto, J., & Schwartz, D. (2010). Is peer victimization association with academic achievement? A meta-analytic review. Social Development, 19, 221–242.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2009.00539.x
Nielsen, M. B., Matthiesen, S. B., & Einarsen, S. (2010), The impact of methodological moderators on prevalence rates of workplace bullying. A metaanalysis. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 83, 955–979.
doi:10.1348/096317909X481256
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2008). 21st Century Skills, Education & Competitiveness. Tucson, AZ: Author. Retrieved from: http://www.p21.org/storage
/documents/21st_century_skills_education_and_competitiveness_guide.pdf
Perna, L., Rowan-Kenyon, H., Thomas, S., Bell, A., Anderson, R., & Chunyan, L.
(2008). The role of college counseling in shaping college opportunity: Variations
across high schools. Review of Higher Education, 31(2), 131–159.
Perry, J. C., Liu, Z., & Pabian, Y. (2010). School engagement as a mediator of academic
performance among urban youth: Parental career support and teacher support.
Counseling Psychologist, 38, 269–295. doi:10.1177/0011000009349272
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review
of the literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 8, 698–714. doi:10.1037/0021
-9010.87.4.698
Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives: A location for counseling psychologists. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40, 425–433. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.40.4.425
Richardson, M. S. (2012). Counseling for work and relationship. Counseling Psychologist, 40, 190–242. doi:10.1177/0011000011406452

Relational Inﬂuences on Career Development

355

Rivera, L. M., & Schaefer, M. B. (2009). The Career Institute: A collaborative career
development program for traditionally underserved secondary (6–12) school
students. Journal of Career Development, 35, 406–426. doi:10.1177/0894845308327737
Rodrı́guez-Muñoz, A., Moreno-Jiménez, B., Sanz Vergel, A. I., & Garrosa Hernández,
E. (2010). Post-traumatic symptoms among victims of workplace bullying: Exploring gender differences and shattered assumptions. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 40, 2616–2635. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2010.00673.x
Roe, A. (1957). Early determinants of vocational choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 4, 212–217.
Sanchez, B., Esparza, P., & Colon, Y. (2008). Natural mentoring under the microscope: An investigation of mentoring relationships and Latino adolescents’ academic performance. Journal of Community Psychology, 36, 468–482. doi:2008–05377
-00510.1002/jcop.20250
Savickas, M. (2005). The theory and practice of career construction. In S. Brown &
R. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work
(pp. 42–70). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Savickas, M. L., Nota, L., Rossier, J., Dauwalder, J. P., Duarte, M. E., Guichard,
J., & Vianen, van A. E. M. (2009). Life designing: A paradigm for career construction in the 21st century. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 75, 239–250. doi:10.1016/
j.jvb.2009.04.0042009-13571-001
Schultheiss, D. (2003). A relational approach to career counseling: Theoretical
integration and practical application. Journal of Counseling and Development, 81,
301–310.
Schultheiss, D. E. P. (2006). The interface of work and family life. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 37, 334–341. doi:2006-09259-00210.1037/0735
-7028.37.4.334
Schultheiss, D. E. P. (2009). To mother or matter: Can women do both? Journal of
Career Development, 36, 25–47. doi:10.1177/08948453093407952009-12455-003
Schultheiss, D. E. P., Kress, H. M., Manzi, A. J., & Glasscock, J. M. (2001). Relational
inﬂuences in career development: A qualitative inquiry. Counseling Psychologist,
29, 214–239. doi:2001-00036-002
Schultheiss, D. E. P., Palma, T., & Manzi, A. (2005). Career development in middle childhood: A qualitative inquiry. Career Development Quarterly, 53, 246–262.
doi:2005-02922-005
Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A. Nadal, K., &
Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in everyday life: Implications for clinical practice. American Psychologist, 62, 271–286. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.62.4.271
Super, D. E. (1957). The psychology of careers. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span, life-space, approach to career development. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 13, 282–298.
Thompson, R., & Whimper, L. A. (2010). Exposure to family violence and reading
level of early adolescents. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment, & Trauma, 19,
721–733. doi:10.1080/10926771003781347

356

Career Development and Counseling

Tierney, W. G., & Auerbach, S. (2005). Toward developing an untapped resource:
The role of families in college preparation. In W. G. Tierney, Z. Corwin, & J. E.
Colyar (Eds.), Preparing for college: Nine elements of effective outreach (pp. 29–48).
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Tyson, K., Darity, W., & Castellino, D. (2005). It’s not a ‘‘Black thing’’: Understanding
the burden of acting White and other dilemmas of high achievement. American
Sociological Review, 70, 582–605. doi:10.1177/0003122405070004031
United States Department of Justice. (2011). Criminal victimization 2010. Washington,
DC: Author.
van Steenbergen, E. F., Ellemers, N., & Mooijaart, A. (2007). How work and family
can facilitate each other: Distinct types of work–family facilitation and outcomes
for women and men. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 12, 279–300.
doi:10.1037/1076-8998.12.3.279
Vera, E. M., Caldwell, J., Clarke, M., Gonzales, R., Morgan, M., & West, M. (2007).
The Choices program: Multisystemic interventions for enhancing the personal
and academic effectiveness of urban adolescents of color. Counseling Psychologist,
35, 779–796. doi:10.1177/0011000007304590
Vignoli, E., Croity-Belz, S., Chapeland, V., de Fillipis, A., & Garcia, M. (2005).
Career exploration in adolescents: The role of anxiety, attachment, and parenting style. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67, 153–168. doi:2005–11536-00310
.1016/j.jvb.2004.08.006
Vondracek, F. W., Lerner, R. M., & Schulenberg, J. W. (1986). Career development: A
life-span developmental approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wartman, K. L., & Savage, M. (2008). Parent involvement in higher education: The
relationship among students, parents, and the institution. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.
Wentzel, K. R., Battle, A., Russell, S. L., & Loony, L. B. (2010). Social supports from
teachers and peers as predictors of academic and social motivation. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 35, 193–210. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2010.03.002
Wright, S. L., & Perrone, K. M. (2008). The impact of attachment on career-related
variables: A review of the literature and proposed theoretical framework to
guide future research. Journal of Career Development, 35, 87–106. doi:2009–01080
-00110.1177/0894845308325643
Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., & Mortimer, J. T. (2006). Adolescent work, vocational
development, and education. Review of Educational Research, 76, 537–566.
doi:10.3102/00346543076004537

C H A P T E R 13

The Career Development of Youth
and Young Adults With Disabilities
ELLEN S. FABIAN AND ROXANNA PEBDANI

U

NDERSTANDING THE CAREER development of youth and young adults with

disabilities requires knowledge of both individual and environmental factors. One of the challenges of trying to conceptualize
the impact of disability on career development is the enormous heterogeneity among individuals with disabilities, suggesting that no theory can
be fully applicable or nonapplicable to this group (Szymanski, Enright,
Hershenson, & Ettinger, 2010). As a result, disability is best viewed not
as a static construct that has a similar effect on all individuals, but as a
socially deﬁned construct that can be a risk factor to the achievement of
career and social participation (Pledger, 2003). From this perspective, one
can understand that although the career development of individuals with
disabilities follows the same processes and is impacted by the same factors
as the career development of nondisabled individuals, having a disability
exposes individuals to unique experiences that may inﬂuence their career
development.
Despite decades of advances in special education and disability law and
policy, the postschool outcomes for many youth with disabilities exiting
from special education programs remain dismal and considerably below
those of their peers without disabilities (Newman, Wagner, Cameto, &
Knokey, 2009). This state of affairs not only limits opportunities to these
youth but also guarantees that the ﬁnancial and social costs of their unfulﬁlled potential will be ones that the entire country continues to pay for well
into this century. For example, recent information from the Social Security
Administration indicates that about 350,000 youth ages 18 to 25 are receiving
357

358

Career Development and Counseling

disability-related social security income supports rather than working. This
alone costs taxpayers more than $10 billion annually (Social Security Administration [SSA], 2011).
School reform initiatives popularized at the turn of the 20th century may
have limited impact on the more than 2.2 million special education students in America today, less than 30% of whom earn a high school diploma
(Wittenburg & Maag, 2002). In general, students who receive special education certiﬁcates are more likely to be unemployed, more likely to earn less
money when they eventually secure work, and more likely to receive public assistance than they would if they had obtained a high school diploma
(Newman et al., 2009).
Unfortunately, the bleak future encountered by these youth is not
improved upon their entering adulthood. The economic and labor force
achievements associated with working-age adults with disabilities signiﬁcantly lags behind that of adults without disabilities in America. Recent data
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011) reports that 23% of youth with
disabilities participated in the labor force compared to 35% of those without
disabilities. As these youths age, the disparities increase. For example, 45%
of young adults with disabilities ages 20 to 24 participate in the labor force
compared to 72% of young adults without disabilities. In general, estimates
are that 66% of the working-age population of individuals with disabilities
are not participating in the labor force (U.S. BLS, 2011).
Finally, the National Longitudinal Transition Study (NLTS), the largest
study of school-to-adult life transition of students leaving secondary special
education programs, found that only 20% of these students achieved what
they (i.e., the students themselves) considered successful adult adjustment
by 5 years after graduation. Successful adult adjustment was deﬁned as
independent functioning in the following three domains: (1) employment,
(2) residential, and (3) social activities (Wagner, Newman, Cameto, Garza, &
Levine, 2005).
The barriers to work participation for youth and young adults with
disabilities have been addressed by federal legislation, policy initiatives,
and vocational program advances. Still, employment and educational data
associated with this group suggest that they continue to fare worse than
any other group in America. The purpose of this chapter is to review the
context and issues confronted by youth and young adults with disabilities
as they manage their careers and work lives. Speciﬁcally, we describe
characteristics of the population, review signiﬁcant legislative and policy
issues that inﬂuence career and employment, summarize effective career
programmatic interventions, and recommend best practices.

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

359

DEFINITIONS OF DISABILITY
According to the 2010 United States Census, approximately 49.7 million
Americans report some type of disability. Recent data from the American
Community Survey indicate that about 5.6% of youth ages 16 to 20 report having one or more disabilities (Erickson, Lee, & von Schrader, 2010). It requires
little imagination to see the enormous heterogeneity of abilities, limitations,
and experiences within this large group. There are multiple types of disabilities (e.g., spinal cord injuries, developmental disabilities, psychiatric
disorders, sensory disorders, AIDS), all of which exist along a continuum of
severity in terms of their impact on the functional capacities of the individual.
In addition, myriad factors inﬂuence an individual’s reaction to disability,
including personality, age, intelligence, educational level, family factors,
gender, and exposure to discrimination and prejudice (e.g., Lidal, Huynh, &
Biering-Sørensen, 2007; Wewiorski & Fabian, 2004; Xu & Martz, 2010). All of
these factors, in turn, inﬂuence careers and employment (Patterson, DeLaGarza, & Scaller, 1997). Given these issues, it is clear that any deﬁnition of
disability needs to be broad enough to encompass them and to take into
account the interaction of the functional attributes of the disability with the
environment.
Although there is no one accepted or universal deﬁnition of disability,
today disability is understood as a multifaceted experience representing an
interaction of the person and the environment. Older deﬁnitions of disability
equated the idea of having an impairment or a pathology with having a
handicap (Hahn, 1993). This medical model deﬁnition attributed the barriers
that individuals with a disability encountered to the impairment or health
condition, thus locating the ‘‘problem’’ within the individual. The medical
model solution to vocational training was either to change the person, by
ameliorating the condition to the extent possible, or, where not possible,
to compensate for the disability by training the person to function in an
alternative way.
Disability advocates in the 1960s argued against this medical model,
proposing that disability could be understood as a barrier in the environment,
not in the individual, and that removing obstacles meant modifying the
physical and the social environment, not changing the person. The personin-environment conception that has emerged today not only reﬂects federal
deﬁnitions of disability but also provides a framework for rehabilitation and
career interventions (Szymanski et al., 2010). Recently, deﬁnitions describing
disability as a positive attribute have emerged (e.g., Davis, 2010). These
new deﬁnitions challenge the idea that persons need to develop the skills
and have opportunities to succeed despite their disability and present the

360

Career Development and Counseling

perspective that persons can succeed with and because of their disability, if
the social-political environment is changed.
Being aware of emerging disability deﬁnitions is important because they
affect the attitudes and behaviors of both persons with disabilities and the
professionals who provide services to them (Hershenson, 1992). Understanding the meaning of disability to the individual is crucial to understanding
the impact of the disability on his or her career development (Beveridge,
Craddock, Liesener, Stapleton, & Hershenson, 2002). Understanding how
professionals deﬁne disability facilitates selection of interventions that do
not unintentionally impede career and social participation outcomes of youth
and young adults with disabilities.
Although there is consensus today regarding the multifaceted approach
to understanding disability, there are still more than 20 different federal
deﬁnitions of disability written into various laws (National Institute on
Disability and Rehabilitation Research, 1995). The most relevant laws—those
that would encompass the majority of youth and young adults—include
special education, vocational rehabilitation, and the Americans With
Disabilities Act.
The deﬁnition of disability within special education is codiﬁed in the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 (IDEIA;
PL 108–446). IDEIA deﬁnes a child with a disability as a child ‘‘with mental
retardation, hearing impairments (including deafness), speech or language
impairments, visual impairments (including blindness), serious emotional
disturbance (hereinafter referred to as emotional disturbance), orthopedic
impairments, autism, traumatic brain injury, other health impairments, or
speciﬁc learning disabilities, and who, by reason thereof, needs special
education and related services.’’ The deﬁnition of disability under IDEIA
does not presume that the nature or extent of the disability needs to interfere
with functioning in a life domain, as stipulated in other laws, such as those
that authorize adult services through the public vocational rehabilitation
services program. This situation can create difﬁculties and confusion for
many students as they leave school and come under the adult system of
services.
The deﬁnition of disability in the federal vocational rehabilitation program
(codiﬁed in the Workforce Investment Act of 1998) is a physical, mental, or
emotional impairment that needs to present a ‘‘substantial impediment to
employment.’’ Similarly, the Americans With Disabilities Act (P.L. 101–336)
deﬁnition of disability includes a physical, mental, or emotional impairment
that substantially limits functioning in a major life activity, such as walking,
learning, or working. Finally, disability is deﬁned by the Social Security
Administration as a physical or mental condition that is ‘‘marked and
severe’’ and that can be expected to last not less than 12 months or that

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

361

may result in death. Although the Social Security Administration does not
provide services, it does provide income to some 13 million beneﬁciaries
under its disability income support programs (SSA, 2011).
To an extent, the various deﬁnitions of disability have created confusion
for people with disabilities and their families. For example, as of 2009, about
6.6 million children met the special education deﬁnition of disability, with
the largest disability category being learning disability (about 39%) (National
Center for Educational Statistics, 2009). However, not all of these children
meet the vocational rehabilitation deﬁnition of disability, a status that limits
their eligibility for certain types of services. This situation has created an
‘‘aging out’’ phenomenon for youth with disabilities who graduate or leave
secondary schools (where they have qualiﬁed for special services) and then
enter an adult system where their condition no longer meets more stringent
criteria (Certo et al., 2003).
The person-in-environment approach, as reﬂected in some federal definitions, has important implications for career planning and vocational
interventions. First, it is equally important for counselors to have knowledge of working and work environments as it is to have knowledge about
speciﬁc disabilities. This means that counselors must pay attention to how
the physical and attitudinal environment creates career barriers for persons
with disabilities. Second, it provides a foundation for understanding that
an impairment (and the symptoms associated with it) is less relevant to
vocational planning than is the functional manifestations of the impairment
in a speciﬁc environmental context. For example, the fact that an individual
has schizophrenia with its characteristic symptoms is less important than
how these symptoms are functionally relevant (such as attenuated concentration) in a particular job context. Functional deﬁnitions of impairments
enable counselors and clients to develop strategies that reduce their effect on
performance. Third, this approach emphasizes the importance of counselor
knowledge regarding disability law and policy issues to effectively assist
youth and young adults in preparing for and securing jobs.
BARRIERS TO WORK
In American culture, work is understood to encompass both a sense of
identity and the primary means of attaining the economic and social beneﬁts that contribute to overall quality of life. Because of this, employment
has traditionally been among the most critical measures of the status and
progress of various groups in American society, including, for example,
women, ethnic minorities, and people with disabilities. It has also provided
a general yardstick against which the quality of various systems, whether
educational, vocational, or social in nature, has been measured.

362

Career Development and Counseling

For people with disabilities in America, employment has long represented
a signiﬁcant challenge to full participation in society. For example, national
polls of individuals with disabilities consistently ﬁnd that even though twothirds of working-age people with disabilities are not employed, most want
to work (Houtenville, 2000). Interestingly, these discrepancies in employment participation tend to persist through economic cycles; in other words,
whether the rest of the economy is doing well or poorly, unemployment
among people with disabilities remains stuck at 30% to 40% (Bjelland,
Burkhauser, von Schrader, & Houtenville, 2010). This suggests a complex
array of factors, both intrinsic and extrinsic, contributing to this generally bleak picture. It is important for career counselors to be familiar with
the common obstacles to employment; those that have received the most
attention in the literature are described here.
Federal Policy Regarding Disability Beneﬁts and Access
to Health Insurance
People with disabilities who qualify for income support programs through
the Social Security Administration (about 13 million) may be discouraged
from considering employment because they fear loss of beneﬁts, particularly
health insurance (Orszag, 2010, December 9). This issue has been cited as
one of the most severe in terms of discouraging people with disabilities to
return to work or to leave beneﬁts rolls and enter employment.
Employer Attitudes and Discrimination
Despite the more positive media depiction of individuals with disabilities,
and despite legislative advances such as the Americans With Disabilities
Act, there have been only modest improvements noted in the attitudes and
practices of employers (Dozmal, Houtenville, & Sharma, 2008; Hernandez,
Keys, & Balcazar, 2000). This is a particularly salient barrier for individuals
with certain highly stigmatized conditions, such as emotional and mental
disabilities, as well as chronic diseases such as AIDS. Negative employment
attitudes inﬂuence hiring, tenure, and promotion for persons with disabilities
(Dozmal et al., 2008). More important, negative social attitudes, or stigma,
may affect vocational identity development for youth, thus interfering with
several important career processes described later.
Lack of Adequate Preparation for the Workplace
The majority of young people with disabilities continue to lag behind their
peers in postsecondary school training and education (Loprest & Maag,

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

363

2007). Young people with severe disabilities, such as mental and emotional
disabilities, or multiple ones tend to receive inadequate preparation for jobs
and/or leave school prior to attaining employment. Inadequate preparation
also affects persons with mild disabilities. For example, the results of several
studies on the career and employment outcomes of adolescents with disabilities found that they experienced (a) limitations in early career exploratory
experiences, (b) limited opportunities to develop decision-making abilities,
and (c) poorer vocational well-being (Loprest & Maag, 2007; Moore, Konrad,
Yang, Ng, & Doherty, 2011).
Professional Attitudes Toward Employment
People with disabilities who need services the most are frequently the least
likely to be served because of the perceived difﬁculties in providing these
services, as well as the intensity and duration of services required (Certo
et al., 2003; Wehman, Brooke, & Revell, 2007). Moreover, people with severe
disabilities are often not provided with career or vocational choices; instead,
they are frequently ‘‘placed’’ in entry-level jobs that they leave because of
lack of interest and choice in the matter (Fabian, 1999). What Szymanski and
Trueba (1994) wrote nearly two decades ago still applies to individuals with
signiﬁcant disabilities: ‘‘at least some of the difﬁculties faced by persons
with disabilities are not the result of functional impairments, but rather are
the result of a castiﬁcation process embedded in societal institutions for
rehabilitation and education and enforced by well-meaning professionals’’
(p. 195).
LEGISLATION AND DISABILITY
A long federal tradition of laws has provided access to educational and
vocational opportunities for people with disabilities. Knowledge of federal
legislation that affects disability beneﬁts and services is a critical matter for
those who provide career services to people with disabilities. This section
describes the major disability-related legislation with particular relevance to
practice and to the speciﬁc barriers to employment described earlier.
Vocational and career-related support for people with disabilities in the
United States has grown over the past century, partly as a result of federal
legislation. In the early 20th century, services for people with disabilities
were few and far between. In the early 1900s, vocational programs became
more common, and in 1918 the Soldiers Rehabilitation Act provided services
for veterans with disabilities, which were then extended to the civilian
population in 1920. Still, it was not until the mid-1950s that funding for
vocational services for civilians was increased. The Vocational Rehabilitation

364

Career Development and Counseling

Amendments of 1954 expanded the types of services that could be offered
with federal funds and also authorized funding for rehabilitation counselor
graduate programs to increase the numbers and quality of counselors stafﬁng
these programs. However, it was not until the Education of All Handicapped
Children Act in 1976 that children with disabilities were guaranteed a free
and appropriate public education.
More recently, a number of laws have been passed improving workplace
access for people with disabilities. These laws include the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Act, the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Ticket
to Work Incentives Improvement Act, and the Workforce Investment Act of
1998. These laws are reviewed in this section.
The Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEIA; PL 101–476)
The IDEIA established speciﬁc federal regulations for youth with disabilities
who are transitioning from school to adult life. Although special education
legislation has existed since the landmark 1976 Education of All Handicapped Children (EAHC) Act, it was not until this act was amended in 1990,
1997, and 2004 and renamed the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act
that it addressed the issue of special education youth as they prepare to
leave secondary school for adult life. Prior to this, the act referred mainly to
the rights of children with disabilities to a ‘‘free and appropriate public education.’’ In 1990, when the act was renamed, it required that students with
disabilities include transition planning in their individualized education programs (IEPs). Another important policy shift in this law was to mandate that
children with disabilities be educated in the ‘‘least restricted environment,’’
a policy shift that had signiﬁcant implications for school-based inclusion in
both academic and career settings. The most recent amendments to IDEIA,
passed in 2004, created the new name, The Individuals With Disabilities
Education Improvement Act (IDEIA), and mandated collaborative transition
planning to ensure a seamless exit from high school to college or careers.
The transition objectives covered under IDEIA included (a) postsecondary
education and vocational training, (b) employment, (c) independent living,
and (d) social and community participation.
IDEIA has spawned considerable federal investment in devising more
effective vocational interventions for special education youth who exit or
graduate from high school (Sitlington, Neubert, & Clark, 2010). That these
programs are achieving some measure of success is reﬂected in some of the
positive indicators that are attributed to them. For example, according to the
2004 Digest of Education Statistics, 11% of college students reported having
some type of disability (Horn & Nevill, 2006), a considerable increase over

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

365

enrollment ﬁgures in the 1990s. However, as discussed earlier in the chapter,
youth receiving special education services (particularly minority youth)
still lag considerably behind their nondisabled peers on most postschool
outcomes (Fabian, 2007; National Council on Disability [NCD], 2007). It is
clear that despite some progress, IDEIA and its mandates have still not
signiﬁcantly improved the overall integration of youth with disabilities into
adult life. Several of the persisting barriers to inclusion have been discussed
earlier in the chapter, and some are described in later sections on career
counseling and development approaches.
The Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA; PL 101–336)
The ADA, enacted in 1990, represented a major shift in disability policy
in America (Miller, 2000). Its provisions prohibit discrimination against
people with disabilities in all facets of life: employment, public services,
private businesses, telecommunications, and transportation. For career and
employment-related counselors, the major interest is in two key areas of the
ADA: Title I, which covers employment, and the deﬁnition of the protected
individual (i.e., who is an individual with a disability).
The latter deﬁnitional issue has received a great deal of attention in
policy and legal circles since the act ﬁrst passed. The ADA deﬁnes disability
as a ‘‘physical, mental or emotional impairment’’ that substantially limits
functioning in a major life activity. Major life activities are deﬁned broadly
and include walking, speaking, breathing, seeing, learning, caring for self,
and working, among others. Over the years, the courts increasingly limited
the deﬁnition of disability under the act, determining that a disability is no
longer covered when it can be mitigated by devices or equipment (such as
eyeglasses) or medication (such as antidepressants) (NCD, 2003). Although
such a change may seem minor, it had major implications for employees,
who, for example, may have a psychiatric condition that is controlled by
medication but still would beneﬁt from accommodations in the workplace
that would otherwise be offered under the protections of the act. In response
to this narrowing deﬁnition of disability, the Americans With Disabilities Act
was amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2009, in part to address some
of the legal issues arising from the narrowed deﬁnition of who is protected
under the act.
Another key area under the employment provisions of Title I is the
requirement for employers to provide reasonable accommodations. The
law states that employers must provide ‘‘reasonable accommodations’’ that
would enable a qualiﬁed individual with a disability to perform the essential
functions of a job. What is important here is the legal word qualiﬁed,
meaning that an applicant or employee must have the requisite background,

366

Career Development and Counseling

credentials, education, or experience to perform the essential functions
of the job with or without an accommodation. Thus, a clerical employee
who demonstrates requisite typing speed and accuracy and who uses a
wheelchair might need a computer keyboard hand rest that would allow
him or her to type more easily. Typically, reasonable accommodations
are modiﬁcations to the physical space, equipment, workplace procedures,
policies, or practices. When effective, reasonable accommodations have been
found to improve the job satisfaction, retention, and productivity of people
with disabilities (MacDonald-Wilson, Fabian, & Dong, 2008). However,
requesting a reasonable accommodation requires the applicant or employee
with a disability to disclose their condition to the employer. Many individuals
with nonobvious disability conditions (e.g., HIV/AIDS, psychiatric illnesses)
may fail to invoke this right because of a fear of evoking negative stereotypes.
Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act
(TWIIA; PL 106–170)
In 1999, Congress enacted the Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act as a means of addressing conﬂicting federal policies that acted as
barriers in the decision to either enter or return to work for people with disabilities who are beneﬁciaries of one of the Social Security Administration’s
income transfer programs (Social Security Disability Insurance or Supplemental Security Income). The act was designed to extend the health care
coverage (Medicare or Medicaid) that SSA beneﬁciaries are entitled to even
after they make a decision to enter or return to work. The ‘‘ticket’’ portion
of the act gives the individual with a disability the choice of vocational service providers by allowing them to ‘‘purchase’’ these services from eligible
providers. This approach was viewed as one way to motivate beneﬁciaries
in the decision to enter or return to work. Although the voucher system
represents a sweeping policy shift in vocational service provision, the Ticket
to Work has been severely underused since it was enacted. For example,
as of 2011, only 3% of eligible beneﬁciaries were using their ticket to purchase vocational services (SSA, 2011). Explanations for this severe underuse
have to do with systems barriers (there are not enough eligible vocational
providers), the complexity of the federal law and policies (individuals still
fear losing their beneﬁts), and insufﬁcient attention to the meaning of work
and vocational choices for people with disabilities (a topic addressed later in
this chapter).
Workforce Investment Act (WIA; PL 105–220)
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998 was enacted to consolidate
and improve employment, training, literacy, and vocational rehabilitation

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

367

programs for people with disabilities. Under this act, states are required to
write workforce development plans that speciﬁcally address how they will
meet the vocational and employment-related needs of diverse populations
requiring services, including transitioning youth, adults with disabilities,
unemployed and underemployed workers, and various other constituents
with poor employment histories and high unmet needs. Although states vary
in how they implement the WIA, most have established One Stop Career Centers, where people who require various services to support employment, such
as vocational rehabilitation, counseling, or employment training, can access
them in one setting (Gervey, Gao, Tillman, Dickel, & Kneubuehl, 2009).
Title IV of the WIA covers the reauthorization of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973. Important provisions have implications for career planning for
persons with disabilities. For example, self-determination and vocational
choice have been mandated within the act, insofar as its provisions apply
to the state-federal system of vocational rehabilitation services. This aspect
of the act reﬂects the changes in laws over the past several decades that
have emphasized equitable treatment for individuals with disabilities across
educational and work settings.
As is evident, there is a long and complicated history of efforts on the
part of the federal government to offer vocational services and improve
employment outcomes for people with disabilities. Overall, the effect of this
legislation has probably had more to do with improving social attitudes,
community access, and participation of people with disabilities than it has
improved employment outcomes. Although there are a number of complex
reasons for the persisting poor employment rates for youth and young
adults with disabilities, one underlying issue may be improving career and
vocational interventions.
CAREER DEVELOPMENT FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
Before describing career theories and interventions that may be relevant
to improving employment outcomes for youth and young adults with disabilities, it is important to establish the context for career development
for these persons. Career counseling and career development are actually
relatively new concepts in disability studies, even though vocational rehabilitation programs speciﬁcally designed to assist with job ﬁnding have existed
for about a century. Historically, conceptions of disability that focused on
individual deﬁcits tended to severely limit, if not disregard, career choice
activities; they simply emphasized getting a job, any job. Despite numerous
studies supporting the beneﬁts of paid employment for people with disabilities (Dunn, Wewiorski, & Rogers, 2008; Provencher, Gregg, Mead, &
Meuser, 2002), there have been too few efforts to develop theoretically based
and empirically supported interventions for youth and young adults with

368

Career Development and Counseling

disabilities (Hershenson, 2005; Szymanski et al., 2010). This section reviews
some of the widely used theories of career development, including some
that have not been speciﬁcally applied to people with disabilities but that
might have some relevance in addressing their unique needs. Speciﬁcally,
we review (a) trait and factor theories, (b) social cognitive and learning
theories, and (c) developmental approaches.
Trait and Factor Theories
Early vocational rehabilitation approaches to career development relied
heavily on two approaches: (1) trait-factor theories and (2) theories of work
adjustment. The trait and factor or matching approaches (Parsons, 1909)
used in rehabilitation settings emphasized assessing an individual’s traits
(e.g., intelligence), academic or occupational skills, and physical-neurological
capacities (e.g., communication, self-care) in order to predict or match people
to occupations or jobs. During the ﬁrst part of the 20th century (the growth
and expansion years of vocational rehabilitation services in the United
States), people with disabilities were sometimes matched to jobs based on
their skills, but also their impairments. Hence, people who were deaf were
referred to positions in production departments of publishing companies,
where the excessive noise of printing presses were presumed not to be a
barrier to work. While matching people to jobs based on impairments is not
advocated today, the trait and factor approach to career counseling is still the
most widely used in vocational rehabilitation service delivery (Szymanski
et al., 2010), despite problems such as questions about the validity of various
assessment tools, the inattention to career choice, and the focus on the
individual rather than the environment.
The Minnesota theory of work adjustment (Lofquist & Dawis, 1969; see
Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume) and Hershenson’s (1981)
theory are trait and factor or person-environment ﬁt approaches that have
been used widely with individuals with later-onset disabilities. The unique
aspect of these theories is that they were developed to understand work
choice and retention issues for people with disabilities and to suggest
applications to practice. Despite the early attention to work adjustment
theory in the rehabilitation literature, there are few contemporary examples
of their applicability, particularly in relation to youth and young adults
(Szymanski et al., 2010).
Social Learning and Cognitive Theories
Both social cognitive career theory (SCCT; see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume) and self-determination theory have garnered signiﬁcant contemporary

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

369

attention as promising approaches to improving employment outcomes for
youth and young adults with disabilities.
SCCT. Interest in self-efﬁcacy as a potentially useful construct in explaining
career behavior emerges from studies that have examined this construct in
other special populations, such as women (Hackett & Betz, 1981) and racialethnic minorities (Hackett & Byars, 1996). In the disability literature, selfefﬁcacy has also been studied as a predictor of work status among samples of
individuals with a variety of impairments. For example, several authors have
examined the relation of self-efﬁcacy beliefs to career interests and behavior
of students with learning and emotional disabilities, suggesting that not
only do such students have lower efﬁcacy beliefs than their nondisabled
peers (Ochs & Roessler, 2001; Slemon & Shaﬁr, 1997) but also that selfefﬁcacy beliefs play an important role in understanding their career choice
and interests.
Paganos and DuBois (1999) investigated the relationship between selfefﬁcacy beliefs and career interests in high school students with learning
disabilities and found that self-efﬁcacy was the strongest contributor to career
interests for these students, beyond the contribution of outcome expectancies.
Similarly, Ochs and Roessler (2001) found signiﬁcantly lower career selfefﬁcacy beliefs among high school students with learning disabilities than
among their nondisabled peers. In a study of students with serious emotional
disturbance, Willis (2002) found work self-efﬁcacy beliefs to be a signiﬁcant
predictor of postschool employment.
Studies have also examined the utility of social cognitive predictors of
employment outcomes for other disabled groups. For example, Regenold,
Sherman, and Fenzel (1999) found that higher work self-efﬁcacy beliefs
predicted employment status for a sample of individuals with psychiatric
disorders. In another study of predictors of vocational outcome among
adults with psychiatric disorders, Mowbray, Bybee, Harris, and McCrohan
(1995) found that positive outcome expectations regarding return to work
were predictive of work status. Altmaier, Russell, Kao, Lehmann, and
Weinstein (1993) found conﬁdence in the ability to perform various activities
of daily living were related to positive rehabilitation outcomes for clients
with low back pain. Barlow, Wright, and Cullen (2002) found that higher
job-seeking self-efﬁcacy beliefs were associated with the ability to manage
disability issues during job interviews among a heterogeneous group of
people with disabilities. Finally, Hutton (2006) found that work-related selfefﬁcacy was positively related to individuals with arthritis requesting job
accommodations.

370

Career Development and Counseling

Several studies have also been designed to enhance self-efﬁcacy beliefs
(Strauser, Lustig, & Ciftci, 2008). Conyers and Szymanski (1998) found that
a brief career intervention was effective in improving career self-efﬁcacy for
college students with and without disabilities. Enright (1997) evaluated a
short-term career intervention designed to improve career decision-making
self-efﬁcacy and self-esteem among a heterogeneous group of adults with
disabilities. Although the experimental group did not gain higher levels
of career decision-making self-efﬁcacy, they did show an increase in life
decision-making self-efﬁcacy. Finally, Fabian, Beveridge, and Ethridge (2009)
found that the SCCT construct of career barriers was applicable to a sample
of clients in a state vocational rehabilitation system; they also found that
personal and social support factors potentially mitigated the inﬂuence of
these barriers on clients’ intentions to work.
Self-determination theory. Self-determination has been a guiding principle or
philosophy in the delivery of vocational and rehabilitation services to people with signiﬁcant disabilities since the early 1970s (Nirje, 1980). Although
initially self-determination for people with disabilities was deﬁned more
as a philosophy or policy, later efforts have sought to deﬁne the theory
and its constructs to develop appropriate interventions. Philosophically, selfdetermination refers to the rights of people with disabilities to exercise choice.
Conceptually, self-determination is a theory of motivation that ‘‘highlights
the importance of three fundamental psychological needs—autonomy, competence, and relatedness’’ (Guay, Senecal, Gauthier, & Fernet, 2003, p. 165).
In special education and rehabilitation, self-determination has been
broadly deﬁned as the combination of skills, knowledge, and beliefs that
enable a person to engage in goal-directed, self-regulated, and autonomous
behavior (Algozinne, Browder, Karvonen, Test, & Wood, 2001). This broad
deﬁnition has led to a lack of consistency in efforts to apply SDT to the
career-related needs of people with disabilities. Algozzine and colleagues
noted this difﬁculty in their meta-analysis of the effect of self-determination
skills training on academic and career-related outcomes for people with
disabilities. They concluded that studies deﬁned and operationalized
self-determination variously as informed choice, decision-making skills,
and self-advocacy skills, among others. For example, Wehmeyer and
Kelchner (1995) developed an instrument, the ARC Self-Determination
Scale, to measure what they referred to as ‘‘functional’’ self-determination,
which included such diverse elements as problem solving, decision making,
planning, self-advocacy, self-efﬁcacy, and outcome expectations.
Wehmeyer and Schwartz (1998) found that higher levels of selfdetermination related to better jobs and longer job retention for a sample of

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

371

young adults with intellectual disabilities, a ﬁnding replicated in a follow-up
study (Wehmeyer & Palmer, 2003). Benitez, Lattimore, and Weymeyer
(2005) used a case study design to evaluate the effects of a self-determination
career development model on involvement of students with emotional and
behavioral disorders in vocational planning. Wehmeyer and colleagues
(2009) developed a career intervention model to improve career planning
and decision making for young women with intellectual disabilities.
Developmental Theories
Two developmental theories that are particularly applicable to people with
disabilities include Super’s (1990) life-span, life-space theory (see Hartung,
Chapter 4, this volume) and Gottfredson’s (2005) theory of circumscription
and compromise.
Super’s theory. Career maturity, a construct emerging from Super’s career
development theory (Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996) has been studied
in the disability literature. In this research, the timing of the disability
during a person’s career development is important to consider, and three
subgroups of persons with disabilities have been identiﬁed and hypothesized
to undergo different career development processes: those with precareeronset disabilities, those with midcareer-onset disabilities, and those with
progressive or episodic disabilities (Beveridge et al., 2002).
Persons with precareer disabilities progress through their career development with a disability. Research on the lack of workplace preparation for
persons with disabilities (especially those with developmental and learning
disabilities) is most applicable to this group. Individuals with midcareer
disabilities acquire or are diagnosed with a disability at some point during
their career development. According to Hershenson (1996), if the impairments (perceived or actual) associated with the disability affect the person’s
work competencies, they will result in subsequent changes in their work
personality and work goals. Super (1990) referred to this as a ‘‘minicycle,’’
involving the recycling of new growth, exploration, and establishment tasks.
Depending on the age of initial onset or diagnosis, the effects of progressive
or episodic disabilities can be similar to those of precareer or midcareer disabilities. An important difference is that each signiﬁcant functional change
in an individual’s disability has the potential to have a similar effect to
that of acquiring a midcareer disability, as well as a potential cumulative
effect. It is necessary to understand the effect of each episode or change
in functional abilities on the individual’s attitudes about both work and
disability.

372

Career Development and Counseling

Several studies have suggested that individuals with disabilities manifest
lower levels of career maturity than their nondisabled peers (e.g., Hitchings,
Luzzo, Retish, Horvath, & Ristow, 1998). Mori (1982) found that special
education students were signiﬁcantly less knowledgeable about job duties
than were general education students. Rojewski (1993) found that learningdisabled high school students scored lower in career maturity than did their
nondisabled peers. Ochs and Roessler (2001) similarly found lower levels
of career maturity and career information among disabled high school students. Although the number of studies exploring career maturity and other
developmental constructs among youth and young adults with disabilities
is small, there is empirical support for its utility in the disability context
(Lindstrom & Benz, 2002). For example, the sequence of developmental tasks
and stages is applicable to understanding and promoting career progression of those with congenital disabilities. In addition, as Szymanski and
colleagues (2010) explain, developmental constructs can be useful for exploring and intervening when certain types of traumatic disabilities may create
‘‘career regression,’’ that is, when the extent of the impairments requires
reconsideration of career goals.
Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and compromise. Children with earlyonset or congenital impairments often lack exposure to or participation in
early career activities (such as role-playing or fantasies) due to poor educational settings, parental overprotection, and social stigmatization (Cohen,
Nabors, & Pierce, 1993; Fleitas, 2000; Macharey & von Suchodoletz, 2008).
According to Gottfredson’s theory (2005), lack of participation or exposure to
age-appropriate career activities puts children at risk for restrictions in later
career or vocational options or prematurely ruling out career possibilities.
This hypothesis may help explain, for example, why youth with disabilities
frequently exit high school lacking a career goal (Fabian, 2007) or even perceiving the possibility of a vocational future. Studies have shown that even
when children with early-onset disabilities are mainstreamed into regular
academic settings, social isolation and stigmatization can limit their active
participation in meaningful career and academic development activities
(Loprest & Maag, 2007).
Moreover, Gottfredson (2005) suggests that individual developmental processes, such as cognitive ability, are important considerations in deciding
whether children are ‘‘ready’’ for and can beneﬁt from career activities. For
example, she posits that the way career information is presented (in terms of
complexity and comprehensibility) to school-age children will be differentially useful, depending on a child’s cognitive development stage. Thus, the
fact that children with early-onset disabilities may be socially or cognitively

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

373

prevented from beneﬁting from school-based career activities may restrict
their exploration, increase the likelihood that they will prematurely foreclose
on career possibilities, and interfere with goal setting and achievement. One
recent study of the vocational well-being of adults who had early-onset or
congenital disabilities found that they expressed lower overall well-being
and more employment discrimination than those with later-onset disabilities
(Moore et al., 2011). Gottfredson’s theory, although not widely used in the
disability career-related literature, may shed some light on the persistently
poor postschool employment outcomes for youth with disabilities.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CAREER COUNSELING
Traditional career counseling approaches for individuals with disabilities
have relied on trait and factor approaches, where the emphasis was on
matching capacities to job demands. Although there is nothing inherently
wrong with this approach, the manner in which practices evolved proved
problematic in terms of assisting individuals with disabilities to secure
jobs based on choice. One problem is that vocational evaluations tended to
emphasize deﬁcits, which can severely constrain choice. Second, even within
a ‘‘strengths-based’’ assessment approach, various problems have been
noted in the application of standardized tests and instruments for people
with disabilities (Parker & Schaller, 2003), raising questions about their
predictive usefulness with several disabled populations. Speciﬁc problems
include nonrepresentative norms, inexperienced test takers, inappropriate
and/or inadequate modiﬁcations to standardization protocols, and poorly
trained examiners (Parker & Schaller, 2003).
Traditional career assessments have sometimes been modiﬁed by, for
example, including informal interviews and observational techniques
(Power, 2000), having family members or signiﬁcant others participate in
helping the individual identify interests and skills (Hagner & DiLeo, 1993),
and relying more on contextual assessment methods, where observations
and ratings occur in a speciﬁc environmental context. In this manner, career
assessment can become an intervention, particularly from a ‘‘strengthsbased’’ perspective, that helps motivate the individual toward an employment orientation.
Another type of intervention that has received some attention is improving
career- and work-related self-efﬁcacy. In this regard, it is particularly important to note that individuals with disabilities tend to have lower efﬁcacy
beliefs and outcome expectations regarding career- and work-related factors
than their nondisabled peers (e.g., Szymanski et al., 2010). This ﬁnding is not
surprising, as they may have less exposure to the types of experiences and
activities that contribute to building efﬁcacy, such as volunteer and work

374

Career Development and Counseling

experiences, exposure to role models, and reinforcing feedback (Benz &
Halpern, 1993). In addressing these barriers, it is important to note that the
studies that have used interventions to improve career self-efﬁcacy beliefs
have shown positive results in terms of mitigating the effects of negative
feedback and/or environmental inadequacies that have limited vocational
development (Conyers & Szymanski, 1998). For example, Breeding (2008)
demonstrated that an expanded, collaborative career assessment approach
in vocational rehabilitation settings improved career decision-making selfefﬁcacy among a sample of disabled participants. Allaire, Niu, and LaValley
(2005) explored the effects of a job retention intervention designed to improve
participants’ beliefs in their capacity to work. They found that those in the
treatment group experienced almost a 50% reduction in job termination
compared to the control group. This suggests that career counselors need
to assess—either formally or informally—the work-related efﬁcacy beliefs
and outcome expectations of their clients with disabilities and be aware of
how these beliefs may have compromised their interests, goals, and future
expectations.
Direct interventions designed to bolster self-efﬁcacy can be incorporated
into career counseling programs using strategies that help clients anticipate
and shape a vocational future (Fabian, 2000; Strauser et al., 2008). Counselors
can ensure that clients are exposed to a diverse array of vocational options, as
well as peers who have achieved success in different jobs and settings. More
intensive coaching or support, both individually and in groups, may assist
clients with disabilities to persist in achieving their goals. These types of
interventions would apply to individuals in all stages of career development.
Because young adults with disabilities have been found to exhibit lower
levels of career maturity than their peers, counselors may need to incorporate developmentally oriented strategies as much as possible into career
education programs. For example, one of the strongest predictors of successful postsecondary adjustment for youth with disabilities is having a paid
employment experience prior to leaving high school (Luecking & Fabian,
2000). Unlike their nondisabled counterparts, youth with disabilities may
not have had the types of volunteer and entry-level job experiences (such as
babysitting or delivering newspapers) that contribute to developing work
attitudes and interests. Assisting high school students to acquire paid work
experiences, similar to their nondisabled peers, promotes the development
of a vocational self-concept, as these experiences provide opportunities for
exploration, as well as personal feedback regarding vocational preferences
and aptitudes. At the same time, paid work experiences set the stage for
identifying longer-term career goals. These developmental issues are even
more important for children with early-onset disabilities, whose social isolation and family overprotectiveness may impede their participation in career

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

375

development tasks, such as role-playing and career fantasies. Such limited
exposure constrains opportunities by prematurely foreclosing career options.
The purpose of career counseling activities is to assist the individual in
identifying and pursuing career goals. The shift in disability policy from
a deﬁcit model to an empowerment model has also affected rehabilitation
planning and goal setting by encouraging individuals to consider a wider
array of vocational choices (Koscuilek, 1998). At the same time, the Americans
With Disabilities Act improved opportunity structures for people with
disabilities by reducing environmental barriers that may have circumscribed
career goals. Reasonable accommodations that are mandated under the
ADA enable individuals with disabilities to perform a much wider variety
of jobs than were possible prior to its enactment, for example, allowing
hearing-impaired young adults to have interpreters on the job or mobilityimpaired individuals to request adaptive equipment. At the same time,
technological advances have made many work settings and jobs more
accessible to people with disabilities, for instance, e-mail communication as
a means of accessibility for people who are deaf or hearing impaired and
talking software for people who are blind.
As indicated earlier, motivation and outcome expectations are particularly
important for individuals with disabilities, where a paucity of previous
experience, lack of access to role models, and negative social attitudes
may have severely impeded career decision making and goal setting.
Self-determination training interventions designed to improve autonomy,
decision making, and planning skills can contribute to identiﬁcation and
articulation of career goals. Encouraging a perspective on career goals and
future planning may also involve career constructivist interventions that
assist clients to view a career as an ‘‘unfolding story’’ (Krieshok, Hastings,
Ebberwein, Wettersten, & Owen, 1999). Career narratives encourage clients
to make meaning of their vocational selves as they work toward shaping a
vocational future (see Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume). The potential value
of constructivist counseling for this population is its focus on agency and
control—helping the individual trace his or her past and narrate a future.
Another important task for counselors lies in helping clients clarify the
meaning of work in their lives (Blustein, 2008). Particularly for people
with disabilities who encounter signiﬁcant policy, systemic, and attitudinal
barriers to work, discovering reasons or motivators to work need to be
considered in any career development plan. Counselors may need to alter
their assumptions regarding work as a primary life activity to viewing work
as an option that clients may or may not incorporate into their life planning,
similar to the life stage considerations of parents taking time away from
work to raise children or adult children reducing job or career commitments
to care for aging parents.

376

Career Development and Counseling

For some people with disabilities, the need to move seamlessly in and
out of the labor market, depending on health status and other issues,
is more empowering than a one-size-ﬁts-all approach to work (Baron &
Salzer, 2002). Career counselors may need to regard long-term attachment
to the labor market as a necessary and sufﬁcient goal for many but not all
individuals and encourage people to map a vocational future that allows
for individual differences in the amount of energy expended toward work.
This is a particularly important stance for young adults with remittingrelapsing disabilities (e.g., depression, diabetes, AIDS, multiple sclerosis).
For example, a young woman who experiences severe depressive episodes
who wants a career in health care administration may need to look at
occupational alternatives that more easily accommodate rapid reentry to the
job market if she requires time off. Even persons with stabler disabilities may
need to reﬂect on the meaning and value of work in their lives, as well as
prepare to cope with the types of barriers described earlier.
Generally speaking, career counseling tends to taper off when counselor
and client have identiﬁed career goals and speciﬁc steps to achieve them.
However, career counselors may need to be more actively engaged in the
job search and adjustment process with individuals with disabilities, based
on the issues raised earlier in the chapter, such as inadequate preparation
for the job market, disability disclosure issues, negative social attitudes, and
fear of loss of insurance beneﬁts. In the rehabilitation ﬁeld, job search and
subsequent job placement have received a great deal of attention—much
more than general career development or career counseling. As a result,
there are a number of different approaches described in the literature for
helping an individual to secure a job, including job-seeking skills groups
(Azrin, Flores, & Kaplan, 1975), supported employment (Wehman, Revell, &
Kregel, 1998), and marketing applicants to employers using job development
methods (Gilbride, Stensrud, & Johnson, 1994).
The fundamental practices of all of these approaches are similar. They
include careful preparation of individuals with disabilities for job interviews
(including discussing legal rights and disclosure of disability), customizing jobs based on their essential tasks or demands, helping employers
identify workplace accommodation solutions, and maintaining relationships to support work retention and career advancement (Hagner, 2003).
Work retention or job support groups help employees manage possible
negative attitudes, navigate the complex issues regarding Social Security
beneﬁts, and provide connections for future employment. Some of these
services, such as job placement, postemployment support, or beneﬁts counseling, may be provided through various federal and state groups, including
the state’s vocational rehabilitation agency, One Stop Career Centers, and
Social Security Administration ﬁeld ofﬁces. Career counselors may want to
maintain linkages with all of these resources in their local communities.

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

377

A ﬁnal thought regarding career counseling for individuals with disabilities is that taking disability into account is frequently not much different than
considering other individual difference variables, such as race, sex, or age, in
devising effective strategies. Mainstream career development theorists and
practices have tended to ignore the application of concepts and services to
people with disabilities, even as the research in applying these same constructs to other diverse groups continues to grow. Such theory extensions
were also hampered by traditional practices in vocational rehabilitation that
focused on individual impairments and deﬁcits, rather than on the individual’s functional attributes or the environment. As we continue to shift from a
deﬁcit to an empowerment model, it is expected that more attention will be
directed toward understanding the career behavior of and career practices
for individuals with disabilities. Additional research studies that can assist
in extending career theories and practices to individuals with disabilities are
clearly needed.
CONCLUSIONS
• View disability as a characteristic, not an essential personal attribute,

that might need to be considered in understanding career issues and
designing interventions. In other words, youth with disabilities are
more similar to than different from their nondisabled peers. The differences are more likely shaped by background experiences and social or
environmental issues than by individual impairment or health condition.
• It is primarily the differences, usually inequalities, arising from background experiences and social or environmental barriers that create the
greatest need for career counseling and interventions. Make sure that
career intervention approaches include strategies (from any theoretical
approach) that address these social and environmental barriers.
• Understanding and encouraging young adults with disabilities to invoke
their legal rights under the Americans With Disabilities Act is essential in
the career counseling process. Assisting them considering the costs and
beneﬁts involved in disclosing disability in the workplace to invoke these
rights promotes a proactive and timely approach to the identiﬁcation
and request of reasonable accommodations.
• Some particularly worthwhile approaches to improving career outcomes for youth with disabilities include focusing on social cognitive
constructs, particularly interventions designed to boost varied aspects
of career-related self-efﬁcacy. Addressing the complex affective issues
involved in career choice for youth with disabilities, such as adjustment
to disability, and exploring how career choices are affected by negative
social attitudes might be particularly amenable to developmental and
constructivist career counseling approaches.

378

Career Development and Counseling

REFERENCES
Algozinne, B., Browder, D., Karvonen, M., Test, D. W., & Wood, W. M. (2001). Effects
of interventions to promote self-determination for individuals with disabilities.
Review of Educational Research, 71(2), 219–277.
Allaire, S. H., Niu, J., & LaValley, M. P. (2005). Employment and satisfaction
outcomes from a job retention intervention delivered to persons with chronic
diseases. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 48, 100–109.
Altmaier, E. M., Russell, D. W., Kao, C. F., Lehmann, T., & Weinstein (1993). The role
of self-efﬁcacy in rehabilitation outcome among chronic low back pain patients.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40(3), 335–359.
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). 1990. U.S. Code. Vol. 42, secs 12101–213.
Americans With Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADAAA) of 2008, Public Law
110–325, 42 U.S.C., 12101–12210.
Azrin, N., Flores, T., & Kaplan, S. (1975). Job ﬁnding club: A group-assisted program
of obtaining employment. Behavioral Research and Therapy, 13(1), 17–27.
Barlow, J., Wright, C., & Cullen, L. (2002). A job-seeking self-efﬁcacy scale for people
with physical disabilities: Preliminary development and psychometric testing.
British Journal of Guidance & Counseling, 30, 37–53.
Baron, R. C., & Salzer, M. S. (2002). Accounting for unemployment among people
with mental illness. Behavioral Sciences & the Law (20)6, 585–599.
Benitez, D. T., Lattimore, J., & Weymeyer, M. (2005). Promoting the involvement of
students with emotional/behavioral disorders in career and vocational planning
and decision-making: The Self-Determined Career Development Model. Behavioral
Disorders, 30(4), 431–447.
Benz, M. R., & Halpern, A. S. (1993). Vocational and transition services needed and
received by students with disabilities during their last year of high school. Career
Development for Exceptional Individuals, 16, 197–211.
Beveridge, S., Craddock, S., Liesener, J., Stapleton, M., & Hershenson, D. (2002).
INCOME: A framework for conceptualizing the career development of persons
with disabilities. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 45, 195–206.
Bjelland, M. J., Burkhauser, R. V., von Schrader, S., & Houtenville, A. J. (2010).
Progress report on the economic well-being of working age people with disabilities.
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Employment Policy for Persons
With Disabilities, Employment & Disability Institute, Cornell University.
Blustein, D. L. (2008). The role of work in psychological health and well being:
A conceptual, historical and public policy perspective. American Psychologist, 63,
228–240.
Breeding, R. R. (2008). The effect of work interest proﬁling on career decision
self-efﬁcacy and work locus of control. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 51(2),
96–106.
Certo, N. J., Mautz, D., Smalley, K., Wade, H. A., Luecking, R., Pumpian, I.,
Batterman, N., (2003). Review and discussion of a model for seamless transition to adulthood. Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, 38(1),
3–17.

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

379

Cohen, R., Nabors, L. A., & Pierce, K. A. (1993). Preschooler’s evaluations of
physical disabilities: A consideration of attitudes and behavior. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology, 19(1), 103–111.
Conyers, L., & Szymanski, E. M. (1998). The effectiveness of an integrated career intervention on college students with and without disabilities. Journal of Postsecondary
Education and Disability, 13(1), 23–34.
Davis, L. (2010). The end of identity politics: On disability as an unstable category.
In L. J. David (Ed.), The disability studies reader (pp. 301–315). New York, NY:
Routledge.
Domzal, C., Houtenville, A., & Sharma, R. (2008). Survey of employer perspectives
on employment of people with disabilities: Technical report. (Prepared under
contract to the Ofﬁce of Disability and Employment Policy, U.S. Department of
Labor). McLean, VA: CESSI.
Dunn, E. C., Wewiorski, N. J., & Rogers, E. S. (2008). The meaning and importance
of employment to people in recovery from serious mental illness: Results of a
qualitative study. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal 32(1), 59–62.
Enright, M. S. (1997). The impact of short-term career development program on
people with disabilities. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 40, 285–301.
Erickson, W., Lee, C., & von Schrader, S. (2010). Disability statistics from the 2008
American Community Survey (ACS). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Rehabilitation
Research Training Center on Disability Demographics and Statistics (STATSRRTC).
Fabian, E. (1999). Re-thinking work: The example of consumers with serious mental
health disorders. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 42, 302–316.
Fabian, E. (2000). Applying social cognitive career theory to individuals with
psychiatric disorders. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 23, 262–269.
Fabian, E. S. (2007). Urban youth with disabilities: Factors affecting transition
employment. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 50(3), 130–138.
Fabian, E. S., Beveridge, S., & Ethridge, G. (2009). Differences in perceptions of career
barriers and supports for people with disabilities by demographic background
and case status factors. Journal of Rehabilitation 75(1), 41–49.
Fleitas, J. (2000). Sticks, stones, and the stigmata of childhood illness and disability.
Reclaiming Children and Youth, 9(3), 146–150.
Gervey, R., Gao, N., Tillman, D., Dickel, K., & Kneubuehl, J. (2009). Person-centered
employment planning teams: A pilot study to enhance employment and training outcomes for persons with disabilities accessing the One-Stop. Journal of
Rehabilitation, 75(2), 43–49.
Gilbride, D. D., Stensrud, R., & Johnson, M. (1994). Current models of job placement
and employer development: Research, competencies and educational considerations. Rehabilitation Education, 7, 215–239.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W.
Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling (pp. 71–100). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.

380

Career Development and Counseling

Guay, F., Senecal, C., Gauthier, L., & Fernet, C. (2003). Predicting career indecision:
A self-determination theory perspective. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 50,
165–177.
Hackett, G., & Betz, N. E. (1981). A self-efﬁcacy approach to the career development
of women. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 18, 326–339.
Hackett, G., & Byars, A. M. (1996). Social cognitive theory and the career
development of African American women. Career Development Quarterly, 44,
322–340.
Hagner, D. (2003). Job development and job search assistance. In E. Szymanski &
R. M. Parker (Eds.), Work and disability: Issues and strategies in career development
and job placement (pp. 343–372). Austin, TX: PRO-ED.
Hagner, D., & DiLeo, D. (1993). Working together: Workplace culture, supported employment, and persons with disabilities. Cambridge, MA: Brookline.
Hahn, H. (1993). The political implications of disability deﬁnitions and data. Journal
of Disability Policy Studies, 4, 41–52.
Hernandez, B., Keys, C., & Balcazar, F. (2000) Employer attitudes toward workers
with disabilities and their ADA employment rights: A literature review. Journal of
Rehabilitation, 66(4), 4–16.
Hershenson, D. B. (1981). Work adjustment, disability, and the three r’s of vocational rehabilitation: A concept model. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 25,
91–97.
Hershenson, D. B. (1992). Conceptions of disability: Implications for rehabilitation.
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 35(3), 154–160.
Hershenson, D. B. (1996). Work adjustment: A neglected area in career counseling.
Journal of Counseling & Development, 74, 442–446.
Hershenson, D. B. (2005). INCOME: A culturally inclusive and disability-sensitive
framework for organizing career development concepts and interventions. Career
Development Quarterly, 54, 150–161.
Hitchings, W. E., Luzzo, D. A., Retish, P., Horvath, M., & Ristow, R. S. (1998).
Identifying the career development needs of college students with disabilities.
Journal of College Student Development, 39(1), 23–32.
Horn, L., & Nevill, S. (2006), Proﬁle of undergraduates in U.S. postsecondary education institutions: 2003–04: With a special analysis of community college students.
U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for Education
Statistics.
Houtenville, A. (2000). Economics of disability research report #2: Estimates of employment
rates for persons with disabilities in the United States by state, 1980–1998. Ithaca,
NY: Research and Rehabilitation Training Center for Economic Research on
Employment Policy for Persons with Disabilities, Cornell University.
Hutton, C. C. (2006). The role of work self-efﬁcacy in sustaining employment among
individuals with arthritis. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: Sciences and
Engineering, 67 2B.
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. §1401 et seq.
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act Regulations, 34 C.F.R. §300 et seq.

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

381

Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 (IDEIA; PL
108–446).
Koscuilek, J. (1998). Empowering the life choices of people with disabilities through
career counseling. In N. C. Gysbers, M. J. Heppner, & J. A. Johnson (Eds.), Career
counseling: Process, issues and techniques (pp. 109–121). Needham Heights, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.
Krieshok, T. S., Hastings, S., Ebberwein, C., Wettersten, K., & Owen, A. (1999).
Telling a good story: Using narratives in vocational rehabilitation with veterans.
Career Development Quarterly, 46(7), 204–214.
Lidal, I. B., Huynh, T. K., & Biering-Sørensen, F. (2007). Return to work following
spinal cord injury: A review. Disability and Rehabilitation 29(17), 1341–1375.
Lindstrom, L. E., & Benz, M. R. (2002). Phases of career development: Case studies
of young women with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 69(1), 67–83.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1969). Adjustment to work. New York, NY: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Loprest, P., & Maag, E. (2007). The relationship between early disability onset and
education and employment. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 26(1), 49–62.
Luecking, R., & Fabian, E. (2000). Paid internships and employment success
for youth in transition. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 23,
205–221.
MacDonald-Wilson, K., Fabian, E., & Dong, S. (2008). Best practices in reasonable
accommodations: Findings based on the research literature. The Rehabilitation
Professional, 221–232.
Macharey, G., & von Suchodoletz, W. (2008). Perceived stigmatization of children with speech-language impairment and their parents. Folia Phoniatricia et
Logopaedica, 60, 256–263.
Miller, P. S. (2000). The evolving ADA. In P. D. Blanck (Ed.), Employment, disability,
and the Americans With Disabilities Act (pp. 3–18). Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Moore, M. E., Konrad, A. M., Yang, Y., Ng, E. S. W., & Doherty, A. (2011).
The vocational well-being of workers with childhood onset of disability: Life
satisfaction and perceived workplace discrimination. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
79, 681–698.
Mori, A. A. (1982). Career attitudes and job knowledge among junior high school regular, special, and academically talented students. Career Development for Exceptional
Individuals, 5, 62–69.
Mowbray, C. T., Bybee, D., Harris, S. N., & McCrohan, N. (1995). Predictors of work
status and future work orientation in people with psychiatric disability. Psychiatric
Rehabilitation Journal, 53, 31–42.
National Center for Educational Statistics. (2009). Digest of Education Statistics: 2009.
Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d09/tables/dt09_050.asp?
referrer=list.
National Council on Disability. (2003). The Americans With Disabilities Act policy
brief: Righting the ADA. Retrieved from http://www.ncd.gov/publications.

382

Career Development and Counseling

National Council on Disability. (2007). Empowerment for Americans with disabilities:
Breaking barriers to careers and full employment. Washington, DC: Author.
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research. (1995). Federal statutory
deﬁnitions of disability. Falls Church, VA: Conwal. (ERIC Document Reproduction
Service No. ED 427 472).
Newman, L., Wagner, M., Cameto, R., & Knokey, A. (2009). The post high-school outcomes of youth with disabilities up to 4 years after high school. A report from the National
Longitudinal Transition Study-2 (NTLS-2). Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Nirje, B. (1980). The normalization principle. In R. J. Flynn & K. E. Nitsch (Eds.),
Normalization, social integration and community services (pp. 31–49). Baltimore, MD:
University Park Press.
Ochs, L. A., & Roessler, R. T. ( 2001). Students with disabilities: How ready are they
for the 21st century? Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 44, 170–176.
Orszag, P. (2010, December 9). Making disability work. Op-ed, The New York Times.
Paganos, R. J., & DuBois, D. C. (1999). Career self-efﬁcacy development and students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice 4(1),
25–34.
Parker, R., & Schaller, J. L. (2003). Vocational assessment and disability. In E. M.
Szymanski & R. M. Parker (Eds.), Work and disability: Issues and strategies in career
development and job placement (2nd ed., pp. 155–200). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing a vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Patterson, J., DeLaGarza, D., & Schaller, J. (1997). Rehabilitation counseling practice:
Considerations and interventions. In R. Parker & E. Szymanki (Eds.), Rehabilitation
counseling: Basics and beyond (3rd ed., pp. 269–302). Austin, TX: Pro Ed.
Pledger, C. (2003). Discourse on disability and rehabilitation issues: Opportunities
for psychology. American Psychologist, 58, 279–285.
Power, P. (2000). A guide to vocational assessment (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro Ed.
Provencher, H. L, Gregg, R., Mead, S., & Meuser, K. T. (2002). The role of work in the
recovery of persons with psychiatric disabilities. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal,
26(2), 132–144.
Regenold, M., Sherman, M. F., & Fenzel, M. (1999). Getting back to work: Self
efﬁcacy as a predictor of employment outcome. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal,
22, 361–367.
Rojewski, J. W. (1993). Theoretical structure of career maturity for rural adolescents with learning disabilities. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 16,
39–52.
Sitlington, P., Neubert, D. A., & Clark, G. (2010). Transition education and services for
adolescents with disabilities (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Slemon, J. C., & Shaﬁr, U. (1997, March). Academic self-efﬁcacy of post-secondary students
with and without learning disabilities. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Social Security Administration. (2011). Monthly statistical snapshot, August, 2011.
Retrieved from http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/quickfacts/stat_snapshot/
Social Security Administration. (2011). The work site ticket tracker. Retrieved from
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/work/tickettracker.html.

The Career Development of Youth and Young Adults With Disabilities

383

Strauser, D., Lustig, D., & Ciftci, A. (2008). Psychological well-being: Its relation to
work personality, vocational identity, and career thoughts. Journal of Psychology
142(1), 21–35.
Super, D. (1990). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. In
D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development: Applying contemporary
theories to practice (2nd ed., pp. 197–261). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.) Career choice and development
(3rd ed., pp. 121–178), San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Szymanski, E. M., Enright, M. S., Hershenson, D. B., & Ettinger, M. J. (2010).
Career development theories, constructs and research: Implications for people
with disabilities. In E. M. Szymanski & R. M. Parker (Eds.), Work and disability:
Issues and strategies in career development and job placement (pp. 87–132). Austin, TX:
Pro-Ed.
Szymanski, E. M. & Trueba, H. (1994). Castiﬁcation of people with disabilities:
Potential disempowering aspects of castiﬁcation in disability services. Journal of
Rehabilitation, 60, 12–20.
United States Census Bureau. (2010). Disability among the working age population.
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/prod/2010pubs/acsbr09-12.pdf.
United States Department of Education. (2001). Ofﬁce of Special Education Programs,
State and local implementation of IDEA. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). Persons with a
disability: Labor force characteristics summary. Retrieved from http://www
.bls.gov/news.release/disabl.nr0.htm
Wagner, M. M., Newman, L., Cameto, R., Garza, N., & Levine, P. (2005). After high
school: A ﬁrst look at the postschool experiences of youth with disabilities. Menlo Park,
CA: SRI International.
Wehman, P., Brooke, V. A., & Revell, W. G. (2007). Inclusive employment: Rolling
back segregation of people with disabilities. In P. Wehman, K. Inge, W. G. Revel, &
V. A. Brooke (Eds.), Real work for real pay (pp. 3–18). Baltimore, MD: Paul H.
Brookes.
Wehman, P., Revell, W. G., & Kregel, J. (1998). Supported employment: A decade of
rapid growth and impact. American Rehabilitation, 24(1), 31–43.
Wehmeyer, M. L., & Kelchner, K. (1995). The Arc’s Self- Determination Scale. Arlington,
TX: Arc National Headquarters.
Wehmeyer, M. L., & Palmer, S. B. (2003). Adult outcomes for students with cognitive disabilities three years after high school: The impact of self-determination.
Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, 38, 131–144.
Wehmeyer, M. L., Parent, W., Lattimore, J., Obremski, S., Poston, D., & Rousso, H.
(2009). Promoting self-determination and self-directed employment planning for
young women with disabilities. Journal of Social Work and Disability Rehabilitation,
8(3–4), 117–131.
Wehmeyer, M. L., & Schwartz, M. (1998). The relationship between self-determination and quality of life for adults with mental retardation. Education and
Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 33, 3–12.

384

Career Development and Counseling

Wewiorski, N., & Fabian, E. F. (2004). Association between demographic and diagnostic factors and employment outcomes for people with psychiatric disabilities:
A synthesis of recent research. Mental Health Services Research, 6(1), 9–21.
Willis, S. (2002). The relationship of social cognitive variables to outcomes among young
adults with emotional disturbance. Unpublished dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park.
Wittenburg, D., & Maag, E. (2002). School to where? A literature review on economic
outcomes of youth with disabilities. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 17, 265–280.
Workforce Investment Act of 1998, WIA, 112 Stat. 936, Public Law 105–220.
Xu, Y. J., & Martz, E. (2010). Predictors of employment among individuals with
disabilities: A Bayesian analysis of the Longitudinal Study of the Vocational
Rehabilitation Services Program. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 32(1), 35–45.

SECTION THREE

ASSESSMENT AND
OCCUPATIONAL
INFORMATION

C H A P T E R 14

Nature, Importance, and Assessment
of Interests
JO-IDA C. HANSEN

R

information about the properties of
interests but has not provided an answer to the basic question: What
are interests? Identifying the essence and origin of interests and
developing precise deﬁnitions of interests have been elusive tasks. Extant
theories of career development and vocational interests that describe the
function of interests hint at but do not directly address the more fundamental question of what interests are. Early interest theories generally included
both components and determinants in their deﬁnitions of interests. Although
many components of interests have been proposed, three major components
have been identiﬁed most often: personality, motivation and drive, and
self-concept. The two most widely cited determinants of interests are nature,
which emphasizes the heritability of interests, and nurture, which emphasizes socialization and learning and includes numerous environmental and
psychological inﬂuences hypothesized to shape interests. Nonetheless, the
construct of interests has become, in many ways, synonymous with scores
presented on interest inventory proﬁles. Interests, in other words, frequently
are regarded simply as ‘‘what the test measures.’’ Within the context of this
chapter, interests are deﬁned as a preference for activities expressed as likes
and dislikes (e.g., ‘‘I like dancing’’ or ‘‘I dislike text messaging’’).
ESEARCH HAS PROVIDED SUBSTANTIAL

INTERESTS AND VOCATIONAL THEORIES
Vocational interests are one of many variables included in most theories of
career development. Interests also are candidates for inclusion in emerging
perspectives on the biological bases of behavior.
387

388

Career Development and Counseling

Interests in Major Theories of Career Development
Among all vocational theories, Holland’s (1997) theory of vocational personality types focuses most explicitly on interests (Nauta, Chapter 3, this
volume). Holland proposed that interest personalities can be summarized as
six types: Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising, and Conventional. He also postulated that the relationship among these six types can be
illustrated as an irregular hexagon, with the types adjacent to one another on
the hexagon having more characteristics in common than types farther apart
on the hexagon. Holland’s theory features interests as a reﬂection of personality. The notion that interests and personality share common variance
(i.e., are correlated) has been a popular hypothesis for decades. Holland’s
theory of vocational personality types (Holland, 1997), which provides a
comprehensive model of vocational interests and their relationship to career
decision making, satisfaction, and performance, has driven much of the
research that examines the relationship between interests and personality.
His theory also has been used to organize the proﬁles of all major interest
inventories and to develop interpretive materials to accompany the proﬁles;
to provide a framework for integrating higher-order abilities, personality,
values, interests, and needs; and to describe interests relative to people, work
environments, and job tasks.
The extent to which interests play a role in other theories of career
development varies. For example, as described by Swanson and Schneider
(Chapter 2, this volume), the theory of work adjustment (TWA; Dawis &
Lofquist, 1984) focuses on the way in which abilities and values and their
correspondence with an environment’s requirements and reinforcers predicts work outcomes (e.g., satisfaction, performance, tenure). Although TWA
postulates do not specify the role of interests in work adjustment, Dawis and
Lofquist, the primary architects of TWA, do acknowledge that vocational
interests also predict satisfaction, performance, and tenure.
Super’s theory of vocational development, as described by Hartung
(Chapter 4, this volume), includes interests among those constructs that
‘‘form a personality’’ and ‘‘yield an occupational or vocational identity.’’
Super’s career-development and assessment counseling (C-DAC) model also
includes interests as one of several constructs he recommended assessing to
help clients explore their life roles. Super’s model assumes that readiness
to make decisions must be established before the assessment of interests,
abilities, or values can contribute to the career exploration process. Although
Super acknowledged the assessment of interests in the C-DAC career counseling model, the model pays little attention to interests except during the
growth stage. Gottfredson’s (2005) theory of circumscription and compromise, another developmental theory, views social class, sex, and intelligence

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

389

as inﬂuences on a person’s self-concept as well as on the compromises people
make in choosing their careers. Interests are viewed within this theory as just
one of several vocationally relevant elements that compose the self-concept.
The theory suggests that, under certain conditions, people may sacriﬁce
pursuit of career options that match their interests rather than compromise
on other dimensions (e.g., occupational prestige).
In career construction theory (see Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume),
interests play a role in the development of children’s reputations in their families, neighborhood, and schools. Career construction theory acknowledges
Holland’s typology as an operational deﬁnition of vocational personality
and views RIASEC types as self-constructing strategies. In career construction theory, interests are not assessed with the help of an interest
inventory. Rather, interests are explored and identiﬁed when ‘‘counselors
ask clients about manifest interests . . . Interests manifest themselves in
conjunction with such things as favorite magazines, television shows,
or websites.’’
Social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Chapter 5, this volume) also
emphasizes the impact that external forces (e.g., home, schools, peers) have
on the development of interests. However, SCCT places more emphasis on
the mechanisms involved in shaping or molding interests than does Super’s
theory of career development or career construction theory. As individuals
try activities and receive feedback on their performance, they develop both
self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations about the activities. If as a result of
feedback or self-evaluation they view themselves as becoming competent,
then the ‘‘interest in the activity is likely to blossom and endure.’’ Empirical
support for the precise ordering of interests and self-efﬁcacy in the SCCT
model is mixed, but research shows that both interests and self-efﬁcacy
contribute to decisions to pursue activities (see Lent, Chapter 5).
Emerging Perspectives: The Role of Nature in Interest Development
Most career theories, then, focus on the role that nurture plays in shaping and
developing interests. Although none of the career theories explicitly denies
that nature (i. e., genes) plays a role in the origin of a person’s interests, they
also do not directly address the degree to which interests are determined
by heritability of interests. Behavior genetics studies, using twins as well
as participants with other kinships, allow research designs that tease apart
genetic and nongenetic effects. Especially informative research using twins
reared together and apart supports a combination of nature and nurture
determinants of interests. One study, which controlled for gender and age
and used a large sample that included eight kinships, showed a genetic
effect of 36% (Betsworth et al., 1994). This same study identiﬁed 9% shared

390

Career Development and Counseling

environmental effects (e.g., living in the same home) and an additional
55% nonshared environmental effects (e.g., having different friends) and
measurement error. This proportion of genetic and environmental effects is
typical of the results reported in other studies. Such ﬁndings are consistent
with the early appearance of interest choices in young children and the great
stability of interests over the life span.
A social neuroscientiﬁc model of the processes underlying interests is a
new approach that offers some promise for a biological understanding of
the basis for interests (Hansen, Sullivan, & Luciana, 2011). This model is
based on individual differences in the tendency to exhibit positive emotions
as described in behavioral approach systems research. Personality research
has linked the approach system with various individual differences, such as
motivation, positive emotionality, and afﬁliation-communion. In this stream
of research (e.g., Depue & Collins, 1999), approach motivation is conceptualized as having two components: agency (e.g., gregariousness, dominance
in social hierarchies, potency, assertiveness, achievement, activity) and afﬁliative/communal tendencies (e.g., warmth, affection, and social bonding).
Agency (e.g., pleasure from Enterprising activities such as leading, persuading, and selling) and communion (e.g., enjoyment from activities such as
helping and teaching) have been shown to reﬂect distinct neurobiological
processes and have been theorized to shape personality. Given the relations
between interests and personality, agency and communion also may shape
vocational and leisure interests.
The neuroscientiﬁc model can be interpreted in the context of work that has
examined the relations between interests, personality, and abilities and has
shown that Social and Enterprising interests and personality areas are not
clearly associated with abilities. Taken together, these two lines of research
(Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997; Hansen et al., 2011) suggest that people with
low approach motivation (and consequently less interest in Social and Enterprising activities) are likely to have interests associated with speciﬁc abilities
(e.g., visual perception and math reasoning with Realistic and Investigative
interests, perceptual speed with Conventional interests, ideational ﬂuency
with Artistic interests). In contrast, people with high approach motivation
are more likely to have interests that involve working with people. In both
instances, the likelihood of positive reinforcement increases as individuals identify meaningful patterns and consistencies in types of activities,
and these patterns coalesce into vocational interests. Pursuing research that
integrates the approach motivation system and interests may contribute to
understanding the neurobiology that predisposes people to pursue or avoid
vocational and leisure activities.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

391

INTERESTS, PERSONALITY, AND ABILITIES
The relations between interests and personality and abilities have been
studied extensively. The broad brush conclusion from this line of research
is that the three constructs share a small amount of variance but are not
redundant.
Interests and Personality
Many attempts have been made to understand the relation of interests and
personality. Much of this research has focused on Holland’s six types and the
ﬁve factor model (FFM) of personality, also known as the Big Five (Barrick,
Mount, & Gupta, 2003). Some research also has examined the relationship
between either Holland types or basic interests and the 11 personality traits
of Tellegen’s big three (Staggs, Larson, & Borgen, 2007; Tellegen, 2000).
The general conclusion that can be drawn from these lines of research is
that two or three personality and interest variables share a modest amount
of variance: Openness and Holland’s Investigative and Artistic interests,
Extraversion and Enterprising and Social interests, and to a lesser extent,
Agreeableness and Holland’s Social interests. However, research examining
the relations among lower-order personality facets (i.e., 30 NEO-PR-I facets),
Holland’s six personality types, and lower-order interests (i.e., basic interest
scales of the Strong Interest Inventory) suggests that once the associations
between interests and personality facets are accounted for, correlations
between higher-order personality factors such as the Big Five and interest
types are negligible (Sullivan & Hansen, 2004b). Thus, the vast majority of
the relations between interests and personality that have been examined, at
both higher-order levels (e.g., Holland types and the Big Five) and lowerorder levels (e.g., basic interest scales and the 30 NEO Personality Inventory
facets), are relatively weak, and the evidence leads to the conclusion that,
for prediction and career counseling purposes, interests and personality
should not be treated as interchangeable constructs. Research that has
explored the incremental increase in prediction when personality, interests,
and self-efﬁcacy are allowed to make independent contributions supports
this contention (Rottinghaus, Lindley, Green, & Borgen, 2002; also see
Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11, this volume).
Interests and Abilities
Early models of career counseling typically attempted to match the abilities
of the client with the requirements of the job. Later, vocational assessment

392

Career Development and Counseling

was expanded from concentrating on the measurement of abilities to include
assessment of interests. E. K. Strong Jr. (1943), one of the early proponents of
assessing interests in addition to abilities, suggested that ‘‘the relationship
among abilities, interests, and achievements may be likened to a boat with
a motor and a rudder. The motor (abilities) determines how fast the boat
can go, the rudder (interests) determines which way the boat goes’’ (p. 17).
Research supports Strong’s contention that interests add incremental validity
beyond ability to the prediction of educational and occupational choices and
other outcomes (Lubinski, 2000). As Strong (1927a) noted, ‘‘The majority
of [people] are practically equally ﬁtted to enter a considerable number of
occupations’’ (p. 297). He later concluded: ‘‘Interests supply something that
is not disclosed by ability and achievement . . . . Counseling that considers
both abilities and interests is distinctly superior to that based on either alone,
for it is in a position to establish both what the [person] can do and what
[she or he] wants to do’’ (Strong, 1943, p. 19).
Integrative Models
Research examining the overlap of interests, personality, and cognitive abilities has led to integrative models of the role of individual differences in
career counseling. Four trait complexes appear in several integrative models: (1) Science/Math, which includes Realistic and Investigative interests
and math reasoning and visual perception abilities; (2) Intellectual/Cultural,
which includes Investigative and Artistic interests, general mental ability,
ideational ﬂuency, and intellectual engagement and openness to experience; (3) Social, which includes Social and Enterprising interests, extroversion, social potency, and well-being; and (4) Clerical/Conventional, which
includes Conventional interests, perceptual speed, and control, conscientiousness, and traditionalism (Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997). Research that
combines cognitive abilities, interests, and personality offers a more complete understanding of a client’s potential career choices and also suggests
that the resulting trait complexes may be more predictive of individual’s
choices than any one construct used in isolation (Armstrong & Rounds,
2008). Integrative models (e.g., Ackerman and Heggestad’s trait complexes)
also provide an empirical foundation to guide the counselor’s development
of hypotheses about the client and a framework for interpreting results from
vocational and psychological tests (Armstrong & Rounds, 2010).
STABILITY OF INTERESTS
Construct stability is an important prerequisite for any variable incorporated
into decision-making exercises, such as those used in career counseling.
This is especially true for interests because the stability of the construct
is intertwined with the reliability of the scores on the tests used to assess

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

393

interests. If interests are not stable, then interest inventories have no chance of
predicting occupational or educational choices, even over short time spans.
Based on the early work of E. K. Strong Jr. (1935, 1943) and on decades of
research since Strong’s early work, we know that interests are very stable
over time. In fact, interests may be the most stable of all psychological
constructs. We also know that the stability of interests depends on the age at
Time 1 testing (the younger the participants, the less stable the interests) and
the length of the interval between Time 1 and Time 2 testing (the longer the
interval, the less stable the interests). On average, for example, the stability
coefﬁcients for individuals tested at age 18 and again at age 22 (4 years) and
age 30 (12 years) are about .80 and .70, respectively (Hansen & Swanson,
1983; Swanson & Hansen, 1988). Thus, by age 20, interests are quite stable,
even over periods of 5 to 10 years, and by age 25, interests are very stable.
This evidence of the stability of interests for individuals, combined with
evidence of test–retest reliability for an instrument, allows test users to have
conﬁdence in test scores that are used to predict future behaviors, such as
job or college major choice.
Occasionally, efforts also are made to look at the stability of an individual’s
interests. This approach typically correlates an individual’s proﬁle scores for
Time 1 with proﬁle scores for Time 2. Generally, about 50% of individuals
have Time 1 and Time 2 interest proﬁles that are substantially similar,
and for many individuals, the rank order correlations are in the high
.90s over relatively long time periods (e.g., 15 years) (Hansen & Swanson,
1983; Swanson & Hansen, 1988). However, these same studies illustrate
that individual differences in interest stability do occur. The intraperson
correlations for a sample often range from lows in the −.20s to highs in the
+.90s, illustrating that for some individuals, dramatic changes in interests
do occur over time.
Research also has explored the extent to which the interests of people in
speciﬁc occupations or people in general change or remain stable over the
decades. Even in times of a quickly changing society and technology, studies
show that interests of people within a particular occupation (e.g., bankers,
lawyers, foresters, psychologists, engineers, reporters) are virtually identical
over 40 or 50 years (Hansen, 1988). Nonetheless, a cross-temporal metaanalysis covering the time periods of 1976–2004, which used a birth cohort
design, showed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in Enterprising interests for
female college students and smaller yet still signiﬁcant decreases in Realistic,
Investigative, and Artistic interests for male college students. Gender differences in Conventional and Investigative interests also decreased signiﬁcantly
from older to younger cohorts (Bubany & Hansen, 2011). Consistent with
both SCCT and the theory of circumscription and compromise, these results
support the hypothesis that, over time, sociocultural factors may inﬂuence
the development of interests.

394

Career Development and Counseling

WHY MEASURE INTERESTS?
Within the counseling intervention framework, interests may be assessed
for a number of reasons with the goal of helping individuals make informed
occupational and educational choices. First and foremost, measured interests can be used by counselors to guide the development of hypotheses
about clients. These hypotheses, in turn, may be used to guide career exploration and to provide clients with a fresh perspective and new information.
For clients, the proﬁle scores promote self-understanding by various means:
identifying previously unknown interests, broadening occupational possibilities for some people and narrowing choices for others, or simply conﬁrming
career choices. Although expressed and inventoried interests show similar
evidence of predictive validity for occupation and college major choices,
many individuals who must make career and educational choices are undecided. For these clients, the scores on interest inventories can serve as
powerful stimuli to jump-start the exploration process and develop career
ideas and possibilities.
Interest inventories also are used for selection in employment settings
to help employers determine those job candidates who will be most likely
to complete training, stay with the company, and be successful. Some
employers also use interest inventories for placement to help workers ﬁnd the
right position within the company, especially when exceptional employees
become dissatisﬁed with their current positions but wish to remain with the
company in another role. Conversely, career counseling that incorporates the
use of an interest inventory can be very helpful with displaced employees
who have been downsized, terminated, or disabled. In sum, exploration that
includes interest assessment can be valuable throughout the life span: ﬁrst
for educational and job decisions, then again as people seek more challenging
work, then perhaps at some point if they question an initial decision, and once
again, if they experience career plateaus. As people approach retirement,
they may repeat the process of exploring their interests, focusing on ways to
make the transition from actualizing their vocational interests to engaging
in activities that reﬂect their leisure interests (Hansen, in press; Hansen &
Scullard, 2002).
P-E INTEREST CONGRUENCE AND SATISFACTION
AND PERFORMANCE
Research on job satisfaction has shown that a plethora of variables contribute
to the prediction of a satisﬁed outcome (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22,
this volume). The role that interests play in job satisfaction usually is
studied by examining the congruence or match between an individual’s
measured interests and the interest requirements of the environment in

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

395

which she or he works. Typically, these studies look at higher-order interests such as Holland’s six types. The results from these studies, even
those using meta-analysis, are mixed, but generally the correlation between
person–environment interest congruence and satisfaction is about .25 to .30
(Hansen, in press).
Intuitively, one expects the correlations between P-E interest congruence
and satisfaction to be larger. One popular explanation for the smaller than
expected relation is the restricted range (which can decrease correlations)
in people’s job satisfaction (Dik & Hansen, 2008). Another explanation is
that moderator variables, such as occupational level, career stage, Holland
type, personality type, values, group importance, job involvement, and
career salience, play a role in reducing the correlation (Dik & Hansen,
2011). A third explanation focuses on the measurement of the satisfaction
criterion. Multifactor or facet measures of job satisfaction seem better suited
to tease apart the relation between P-E congruence than are global measures.
For example, correlations around .40 have been found between congruence
and satisfaction with more speciﬁc job facets, such as pay, coworkers, and
promotions (Hansen, in press).
A fourth explanation centers on the level at which interests are assessed
in most congruence-satisfaction studies. Often in studies showing relatively
modest correlations, interests are measured and work environments are
coded using Holland’s six types, which represent higher-order interests.
However, studies conducted at a lower-order level of interest assessment
(e.g., occupational scales) suggest that a large proportion of people (e.g., 70%
to 80%) who are satisﬁed with their jobs score high on occupational scales
that match their chosen occupations or college majors (Hansen & Dik, 2005;
Holland, 1997; Pendergrass, Hansen, Neuman, & Nutter, 2003). Finally, the
way in which congruence is operationalized also may affect the congruence
satisfaction relation (Dik, Hu, & Hansen, 2007).
Well-being criteria, other than work satisfaction, shown to be positively
related to P-E congruence include life satisfaction, meaningfulness, happiness, self-image, and self-esteem (Dik & Hansen, 2008; Hansen & Ton, 2001).
Criteria negatively related to P-E congruence include somatic complaints,
burnout, and anxiety. P-E congruence also is related to persistence (i.e.,
tenure), educational and vocational stability, adjustment, and achievement
(Harms, Roberts, & Winter, 2006; Porter & Umbach, 2006). However, combining interests and abilities or aptitudes appears to improve predictions of
achievement in work and academic settings beyond the levels that can be
achieved using either construct alone (Wise, McHenry, & Campbell, 1990).
The data support Strong’s early contention that people will do well in an
occupation if they have both the necessary interest and ability but that
people with only ability and no interest can do well but may not (Strong,

396

Career Development and Counseling

1943). In the same way that the combination of interests and abilities predicts
success and performance better than either does alone, incorporating values
also can improve the prediction of work outcomes, especially job satisfaction
(Rounds, 1990).
METHODS OF INTEREST INVENTORY SCALE CONSTRUCTION
Historically, three methods have dominated the development of interest
inventories: rational-theoretical, the empirical method of contrast groups,
and item clustering. In the course of interest inventory development, all three
methods or combinations of these methods may ultimately be employed. The
rational-theoretical approach begins with a well-deﬁned construct. Ideally,
this approach relies on theory for the deﬁnition of the construct to be
measured and for item development and selection. The deﬁnition of the
measured construct, the item content, and the use of psychometric data
to relate scores to measures of other theoretical constructs contribute to the
interpretation of the scales. The empirical method of contrast groups is based
on the assumption that individuals postulated to differ on the construct also
will differ in their responses to test items. Items are selected for inclusion in
the test because they discriminate signiﬁcantly between two or more groups
hypothesized to differ on a criterion or construct.
The empirical method of clustering relies most heavily on statistical
analyses (e.g., factor or cluster analysis) to identify underlying dimensions in
a large pool of items. The dimensions then become the basis for the scales used
to measure the constructs, which, in turn, contribute to the interpretation of
the scores. In practice, the various approaches to test development often are
used in a logical sequence. Theory is used initially to generate the item pool.
Empirical relationships (i.e., contrast groups or clustering) may then be used
to retain, reject, or modify items. Interpretation of scores from the scales
derived by this process have the advantage of a theoretical and empirical
foundation for the underlying dimensions represented by the test.
ASSESSMENT OF INTERESTS
Three of the most frequently used interest inventories are the Self-Directed
Search (SDS; Holland, 1994), Strong Interest Inventory (Donnay et al., 2005),
and the Campbell Interest and Skill Survey (CISS; Campbell, Hyne, &
Nilsen, 1992). All three of these instruments include scales to measure
Holland’s six types. However, the SII and the CISS measure interests at three
levels of speciﬁcity, whereas the SDS focuses only on the broad Holland
types. Although the SII and the CISS proﬁles include sets of scales that
resemble one another, their approaches to norming and standardizing the

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

397

instruments differ. Another notable difference between the SII and the CISS
is the inclusion of Skill scales on the CISS that parallel the Interest scales.
The Skill scales are designed to provide an estimate of the individual’s
ability to do tasks related to the interests measured by the Orientations
Scales, Basic Interest Scales, and Occupational Scales. The SII does have a
companion instrument, the Skills Conﬁdence Inventory (Betz, Borgen, &
Harmon, 1996), that provides skill estimates for the six Holland types, but
the CISS has Skill scales that match all of the Interest scales reported on the
CISS proﬁle.
Self-Directed Search
Holland developed the Self-Directed Search, ﬁrst published in 1971, as a
vehicle for assessing a person’s resemblance to each of his six vocational
personality types (Holland, 1994). Holland selected items for the SDS using
his theoretical model, which is based on ‘‘voluminous data about people in
different jobs’’ (Holland, 1985, p. 3). The six scales are Realistic (works with
things, practical and concrete), Investigative (works with ideas, analytical
and scientiﬁc), Artistic (works with ideas, creative and imaginative), Social
(works with people, empathetic and warm), Enterprising (works with people,
ambitious and domineering), and Conventional (works with data, detail
oriented and conscientious). Although any combination of types is possible,
the closer the types are on the hexagon, the more likely they are to appear
together as a person’s pattern of interests or as the pattern of activities that
occur in a work environment (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume).
The SDS item pool is composed of 228 items dispersed over four sections:
work activities (66 items), self-estimated competencies (66 items), occupations (84 items), and self-estimates of abilities that represent each of the six
types (12 items). The reading level of the items is estimated at the seventhor eighth-grade level, and a Form Easy (E) is available for individuals who
read at about the fourth-grade level (Holland, 1994). The SDS most often is
given as a self-administered, self-scored, and even self-interpreted interest
inventory. However, a computer-administered and -scored version is available. A scoring key is used to compute raw scores on the six scales that can be
interpreted directly for a client, or scores can be compared to various norm
groups provided in the manual (e.g., high school girls and boys, college
women and men). The three highest raw scores are used to form a summary
code, which is used to identify vocational and educational opportunities that
incorporate similar interests represented in the individual’s summary code.
Holland and his colleagues developed an array of interpretive materials to
be used with the inventory results, including a Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes (Gottfredson & Holland, 1996) and the Educational Opportunities

398

Career Development and Counseling

Finder (Rosen, Holmberg, & Holland, 1997) that provide Holland codes for
occupations and educational programs. These resources are very useful for
matching scores on the six broad types to possible occupations and majors
for a client to consider.
The SDS has been used extensively in vocational psychology research for
the past 30 years. As a result, a wealth of evidence for the validity and
reliability of the SDS has been aggregated. Over 4- to 12-week test–retest
intervals, the median scale score reliability coefﬁcients range from .76 to
.89, respectively. Studies examining evidence of the concurrent validity of
the SDS suggest that adults enter occupations that match their high point
code about 60% of the time. The evidence for predictive validity for SDS
scores is more variable and depends on the length of time between initial
testing and the follow-up assessment, age at initial testing, and educational
level. Generally, studies show that between 40% and 80% of college students
and adults are in majors and occupations that match their summary code’s
ﬁrst letter.
Strong Interest Inventory
The Strong Interest Inventory (SII) was ﬁrst published in 1927 under the
title Vocational Interest Blank (Strong, 1927b). The item pool for the SII
(Consulting Psychologists Press, 2004) currently includes 291 items divided
into six content areas: occupational titles, school subjects, work activities,
leisure activities, self characteristics, and preferences in the world of work.
The reading level is estimated to be at about the eighth grade. The SII
is a comprehensive survey that provides several levels of analysis of an
individual’s interests. At the highest order and broadest level are the six
general occupational themes (GOT) developed to measure the six RIASEC
vocational types proposed by Holland. Within career counseling, these scales
address the question, ‘‘What am I like?’’
The original GOTs were developed using a sequential method of scale
construction. First, items were selected that represent the deﬁnitions and
descriptions that Holland proposed for each of the six types. Then, item
statistics (i.e., intercorrelations) were used to select those items that contributed to the homogeneity of the scales. The GOTs were modiﬁed as
part of the 2004 revision of the SII; Cronbach’s alphas range from .90 to
.95. Test–retest stability over intervals less than 8 months range from .84
(Artistic) to .89 (Realistic). Over intervals of 8 to 23 months, the stability
coefﬁcients range from .80 (Artistic) to .92 (Realistic). Evidence of validity
for the GOT scores includes large correlations between same-named scales
on Holland’s Vocational Preference Inventory (VPI; Holland, 1975) and the
SII and evidence of the power of the GOT to separate occupational groups

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

399

over about 3 standard deviations of scores in a logical way (e.g., engineers
and electricians score high and mental health workers and reporters score
low on the Realistic theme) (Hansen & Campbell, 1985).
The 30 Basic Interest Scales (BIS) represent the next level of speciﬁcity, and
scores on these scales help the client to answer the question, ‘‘What do I like?’’
They include scales such as Mechanics and Construction, Medical Science,
Visual Arts & Design, Counseling & Helping, Entrepreneurship, and Ofﬁce
Management. The original BISs were developed using the empirical method
of clustering. Subsequent versions of the BIS have relied on factor analysis.
As one would expect based on these methods of scale construction, the item
content of each scale is homogeneous, with alpha coefﬁcients ranging from
.80 (Social Services) to .92 (Computer Hardware & Electronics). Similar to
the GOT, evidence of validity for the BIS scores consists of studies examining
the extent to which the scales differentiate occupations in a logical manner
(e.g., auto dealers and life insurance agents score high and psychologists and
physicists score low on the Sales BIS) (Hansen & Campbell, 1985).
The Occupational Scales provide the greatest level of speciﬁcity of interest
measurement on the SII and answer the question, ‘‘Who am I like?’’ They
compare the interests of the respondent directly to those of people employed
in the occupation who are satisﬁed with their work. A total of 122 occupations are represented on the proﬁle; about 30% of the scales represent
occupations that typically can be entered without a college degree (e.g., carpenter, cosmetologist, ﬂorist, optician, travel consultant), and the remainder
represent occupations of a more professional nature (e.g., architect, nurse,
psychologist, social science teacher, executive).
The Occupational Scales are constructed using the empirical method of
contrast groups. This technique identiﬁes about 25 to 35 items for each
Occupational Scale that differentiate the likes and dislikes of women or
men in the occupation from women in general or men in general (called the
General Representative Sample). The item content of the Occupational Scales
is heterogeneous, and, therefore, internal consistency measures of reliability
are not meaningful. However, because the scales are used to make decisions
about college majors and careers, the concept of scale score stability is very
important for this set of scales. The median test–retest correlation for the
Occupational Scales is .86, with a range of .71 to .93 over an interval of 2 to
23 months (Donnay et al., 2005). Evidence of the validity of the Occupational
Scales was a major research focus of early authors of the SII (e.g., Hansen &
Campbell, 1985; Strong, 1943). One study has shown evidence of concurrent
validity for the GOT, BIS, and Personal Styles Scales on the 2004 SII (Gasser,
Larson, & Borgen, 2007). However, no such evidence has been reported for
the 2004 Occupational Scales. Therefore, much of the evidence of validity for
the 2004 version of the SII relies on generalizing from earlier studies.

400

Career Development and Counseling

Two studies (Savickas, Taber, & Spokane, 2002; Sullivan & Hansen, 2004a)
have demonstrated that scores on the SII correlate substantially with scores
on same-named scales on other interest inventories (e.g., the CISS, the SDS,
the KOIS, and the UNIACT). These same studies have shown that SII scale
scores have small correlations with scores on other interest inventory scales
that are unrelated. For example, the median correlation reported for samenamed scale scores for the SII and CISS was .62 and .66 for samples of women
and men college students, respectively. For the same samples, the median
correlations between nonmatching scales (e.g., Conventional and Creating)
were .05 and .06 (Sullivan & Hansen, 2004a).
The extent to which the Occupational Scales predict educational and occupational choices is a line of evidence of validity for SII scores that has been
developed throughout the history of the inventory. The typical method for
examining concurrent and predictive validity (collectively labeled criterion
validity) involves comparing scores on the Occupational Scales to declared
choices. In the case of concurrent validity, the research participants complete
the SII and provide information about their current occupations or educational choices at the same time. In the case of predictive validity, the research
participants complete the SII at Time 1; then, at some time in the future
(usually after several years have passed), they are contacted to participate
in a follow-up study to determine their educational choice or occupation
at Time 2. The summary statistic reported in these studies simply provides
the percent of participants who scored high on Occupational Scales that
match their choices (e.g., a participant who scored high on the Reporter scale
and is majoring in journalism or who scored high on Financial Analyst and
works in that ﬁeld). The results from these studies are quite stable from
one study to the next and from one version of the SII to another. Generally,
the concurrent studies show matches for about 75% of the sample, and the
predictive studies show matches of about 70% to 75% over Time 1–Time 2
intervals of 4 years and about 60% to 65% over Time 1–Time 2 intervals of
12 years (Hansen & Dik, 2005; Hansen & Swanson, 1983).
The fourth set of scales presented on the SII proﬁle is ﬁve Personal Style
Scales (PSS). The Learning Environment (LE) scale measures the extent to
which an individual has interests similar to others who persist in academic
environments. People who score high on the scale often are interested in
learning for learning’s sake and often aspire to complete graduate degrees.
People with average scores on the LE scale have academic interests similar
to people who have completed undergraduate college degrees, and people
with low scores are similar to those who do not pursue college degrees.
Studies examining evidence of validity for the LE scale indicate that the
scores are not related to ability. Rather, interests of those who score low on
the scale tend to reﬂect an interest in education for the practical knowledge

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

401

that can be gained and directly applied to the work setting. The Cronbach
alpha for the LE scale is .76, and test–retest stability over 2 to 23 months is
.88 (Donnay et al., 2005).
The Work Style (WS) scale on the current SII reﬂects interests of those
who enjoy spending time with and working with people (high scores), as
well as those interested in activities that allow them to work with ideas,
data, and things (low scores). For example, child care providers, ﬂight
attendants, and life insurance agents score high and biologists, computer
programmers, and physicists score low on WS. Cronbach alpha for the WS
Scale is .86, and test–retest over 2 to 23 months is .91. The third scale is the
Risk Taking (RT) scale, which measures a willingness to try new things and
to take social, ﬁnancial, and physical risks (high scores). Electricians and
police ofﬁcers score high, and dental assistants and mathematicians score
low. Cronbach alpha for the RT Scale is .82, and test–retest over 2 to
23 months is .86.
The Leadership Style (LS) scale correlates with introversion-extroversion.
High scores reﬂect an interest in leading and managing others, whereas low
scores reﬂect the interests of people who prefer to work alone. Corporate
trainers and public administrators score high; auto mechanics and farmers
score low on LS. Cronbach alpha for the LS Scale is .87, and test–retest over
2 to 23 months is .86. The most recently developed Personal Style Scale is
the Team Orientation (TO) scale, which correlates .55 with the Leadership
Style Scale (Donney et al., 2005). The TO scale has two poles that range
from an interest in accomplishing tasks independently to an interest in
accomplishing tasks collectively. The Cronbach alpha for TO is .86, and the
test–retest coefﬁcient over 2 to 23 months is .74.
The ﬁve Personal Style Scales are normed on a sample of adult women
and men drawn from a large number of occupations. The mean for this
people-in-general sample is set equal to 50, and the standard deviation is set
at 10. Generally, scores on the Personal Style Scales that are above 55 are
considered high, and scores below 45 are considered low.
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey
The Campbell Interest and Skill Survey (CISS; Campbell et al., 1992) is a
320-item instrument that assesses vocational interests (200 items) and selfestimates of skills (120 items) in parallel fashion. Thus, the proﬁle reports
two scores (i.e., interest and skill) for each of the 98 scales. Combining selfestimates of interests and skills into one inventory was a unique approach
at the time of publication of the CISS in 1992. The reading level is estimated
at the sixth-grade level. All of the scales on the CISS are normed and
standardized on combined samples of women and men drawn from a large

402

Career Development and Counseling

variety of occupations. The mean for this sample is set equal to 50 with a
standard deviation of 10. The proﬁle provides interpretive comments, based
on the respondent’s interest and skill scores on each scale, that advise a
course of action for the individual to consider: ‘‘pursue’’ (high interest and
high skill), ‘‘develop’’ (high interest and low skill), ‘‘explore’’ (low interest
and high skill), and ‘‘avoid’’ (low interest and low skill).
The types of scales presented on the CISS proﬁle are similar to those on the
Strong Interest Inventory. At the most general level, the CISS features seven
Orientation Scales. Six of the seven scales measure Holland’s six types: the
Producing, aNalyzing, Creating, Helping, Inﬂuencing, and Organizing scales
measure, respectively, realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enterprising,
and conventional interests. The seventh Orientation scale is Adventuring,
which measures an interest in physical and competitive activities and risk
taking. Evidence of construct validity for the Orientation Scales suggests
that, with the exception of the Adventuring scale, the Orientation Scales are
good representatives of Holland’s six types (Sullivan & Hansen, 2004a). The
median correlation between matching CISS and SII GOT scales is about .70.
For nonmatching scales, the median correlation is about .16. The correlation
between CISS Adventuring and SII Risk Taking scale scores is large (r =
.65), indicating that the CISS scale, similar to the SII scale, is a measure of
willingness to take risks, try new activities, and be spontaneous. Like the SII
GOTs, the CISS Orientation Scales have homogeneous item content, large
alpha coefﬁcients (ranging from .82 to .93), and robust test–retest correlations
(median r = .87 for interests and .81 for skills over 90 days) (Campbell et al.,
1992).
The 29 Basic Interest Scales measure more speciﬁc interests than do the
Orientation Scales and include some interests not represented among the BIS
on the SII, including Adult Development, Child Development, International
Activities, Fashion, Woodworking, and Animal Care. Conversely, the SII
includes Basic Interest Scales that measure interests not represented on the
CISS proﬁle: Healthcare Services, and Programming & Information Systems.
The alpha coefﬁcients for the Basic Interest Scales range from .69 to .92, with
a median of .86 for the Interest scales, and from .62 to .87 with a median of
.79 on the Skill scales. The median test–retest coefﬁcient over a period of 90
days is .83 for the Interest scales and .79 for the Skill scales (Campbell et al.,
1992). Evidence of validity for the Basic Interest Scales includes (a) large
correlations with SII scales that measure similar interests (e.g., correlations
of .86 between SII and CISS Science scales and .77 between SII Teaching
and CISS Adult Development) (Sullivan & Hansen, 2004a) and (b) the
ability of the Interest and Skill scales to differentiate samples of people from
various occupations in a meaningful way. For example, occupations that
have high mean interest scores on CISS Mechanical Crafts include airline

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

403

mechanics, test pilots, and carpenters; occupations that have low mean scores
on this scale include secretaries, social workers, and nursing administrators
(Campbell et al., 1992).
The 60 Occupational Scales on the CISS were constructed using the
empirical method of contrast groups that also is used to construct SII
Occupational Scales. The CISS and SII Occupational Scales do differ in
several important ways, however. First, the SII OS are separate sex scales;
in other words, for each occupation, one scale was developed based on
women in the occupation contrasted with women in general, and another
scale was developed based on men in the occupation contrasted with men
in general. The CISS scales, by contrast, are combined-sex scales that used
criterion (i.e., occupations) and contrast (i.e., people in general) samples
composed of women and men to develop the scales. Another difference is
the way in which the scales are normed and standardized. The SII scales are
normed on the occupational criterion sample with the mean set equal to 50.
Therefore, a score of 50 on the SII OS indicates strong similarity in interests
between the individual taking the inventory and the people in the occupation.
However, the OS on the CISS are normed on a people-in-general sample such
that a score of 50 indicates little similarity with people in the occupation;
rather, scores on the CISS suggesting strong similarity in interests between
the individual and the people in a particular occupation are in the range
of 65 to 70.
The CISS Manual (Campbell et al., 1992) reports the power of each Interest
and Skill scale to discriminate between people in the general population and
those in speciﬁc occupations using Tilton’s overlap statistic. Generally, the
mean score for people in general on the Skill scales is about 1.8 standard
deviations below the mean score for the occupational criterion samples (range
from .9 to 3.5 standard deviations). For the Interest scales, the mean for the
people in general is about 2 standard deviations below the mean for people
in the occupation (range from 1.2 to 2.9 standard deviations). In addition,
two studies demonstrated evidence of convergent and discriminant validity
of scores on the Interest scales with Kuder and SII occupational scale scores
(Savickas et al., 2002; Sullivan & Hansen, 2004a).
Evidence of validity for the Skill Scale scores shows convergence and
discrimination for the Skill Scale scores and the CISS Interest Scales, Strong
Interest Inventory, and self-reported Minnesota Ability Estimates Questionnaire (MAEQ) scores (Hansen & Leuty, 2007). The relations between
same-name CISS Interest and Skill Scale scores range from .46 (Helping) to
.71 (aNalyzing) for females and from .62 (Advertising) to .72 (Helping) for
males. Relations between the CISS Skill Scale scores and MAEQ scores were
in the expected directions. For example, inﬂuencing scores correlated .40
with verbal aptitude, and the correlation between aNalyzing and numerical

404

Career Development and Counseling

aptitude was .49. The correlations between CISS Interest Scale scores and
the MAEQ were lower. For example, the correlation between Inﬂuencing
interest scores and verbal aptitude scores was .25 and between aNalyzing
and numerical scores was .41.
Three studies have looked at the concurrent validity of the CISS to predict
college majors. The ﬁrst two studies examined the use of the Interest and
Skill scales with college students from a variety of majors (Hansen & Leuty,
2007; Hansen & Neuman, 1999). The results of these studies showed that
69% to 72% of the women and 76% to 80% of the men scored high on
Interest scales that matched their declared college majors. The hit rates for
the Skill Scales scores were slightly lower; 58% to 61% of the women and
61% to 69% of the men scored high on Skill scales that matched their majors.
The third study (Pendergrass et al., 2003) examined the extent to which
men student athletes chose college majors that agreed with their measured
interests. Among the student athletes in nonrevenue sports (e.g., tennis,
golf, cross country, swimming), 74% scored high on Interest scales matching
their declared majors. Seventy-one percent of the comparison sample of
nonathlete students and 63% of the athletes participating in revenue sports
(e.g., basketball, football) scored high on Interest scales matching their
declared majors.
Another set of scales on the CISS includes the Academic Focus Scale (AF),
which measures interests and skills related to academic pursuits, and the
Extraversion Scale (ES), which measures interests and skills related to social
interactions. The Academic Focus scale was constructed using the empirical
method of contrast groups that selected items that differentiated people in
general from individuals with high levels of education. The items on the
Extraversion Scale are ones that have large correlations with a composite
extraversion scale from the Campbell Leadership Index (CLI; Campbell,
1991). The 90-day test–retest coefﬁcients for the AF Interest and Skill scales
are .87 and .77, respectively. For the ES, the stability coefﬁcients are .85 for
the Interest scale and .82 for the Skill scale (Campbell et al., 1992).
As expected, high-scoring occupations on the Academic Focus Interest
and Skill scales include those that require college and graduate degrees and
have an interest in science and academic topics such as medical researchers,
physicians, and math/science teachers. Low-scoring occupations include
those in business ﬁelds such as ﬁnancial planners, insurance agents, and
Realtors. High-scoring occupations on the Extraversion Interest and Skill
scales include those who work closely with others, such as guidance counselors and corporate trainers; occupations scoring low include those where
people tend to work alone or with things rather than people, such as chemists
and carpenters (Campbell et al., 1992).

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

405

USING INTEREST INVENTORIES IN CAREER COUNSELING
The use of interest inventories in career counseling evolved out of career
guidance programs that emerged in the 1930s to ease unemployment during
the Great Depression. World War II served as another catalyst, as programs were developed, especially through the Veterans Administration,
to help returning veterans take advantage of educational opportunities
offered through the G.I. Bill to choose new occupations. The University of
Minnesota’s Department of Psychology, with its emphasis on individual differences, assessment, and applied psychology, became a major research and
counseling center with close ties to the Minneapolis VA Hospital. From this
work emerged the trait-and-factor Minnesota Point of View of counseling, a
model that is very directive and involves providing clients with information
and suggestions to guide their decision making. The assessment of abilities
and interests was an important ingredient in early applications of trait and
factor counseling; later, assessment of needs, values, and personality also
was incorporated into the model. Most current models of career counseling
still include assessment of interests as an important component. However,
fewer models emphasize the need to objectively measure abilities, values,
and personality.
‘‘Three Sessions and a Cloud of Dust’’: Assessment and Intervention
Therapeutic assessment (TA) advocated by Finn and his colleagues (Finn &
Martin, in press) has been shown to meet standards of evidence-based interventions (Morey, Lowmaster, & Hopwood, 2010) and to result in positive
personal change (Ougrin, Ng, Low, 2008; Poston & Hanson, 2010). Much of
the empirical work in this area has been done with clients whose diagnoses
include anxiety disorders, oppositional deﬁant disorder, and borderline personality disorder. Many of the 17 studies included in one meta-analysis
(Poston & Hanson, 2010) involved only test administration and feedback,
in other words as little as two sessions, as the therapeutic intervention. Yet,
the results indicated an overall effect size of .42. The ingredients in TA that
may explain why brief interventions that include assessment can have therapeutic effects include using test results to change the client’s self-narrative
or the way people view themselves, using TA techniques to involve clients
in setting goals for the assessment process, and the power of psychological
tests to be ‘‘empathy magniﬁers’’ (Finn, 2007).
Although TA may conjure images of the Minnesota Point of View, models
of career counseling have expanded beyond the old ‘‘test ’em and tell ’em’’
approach. As counselors needed better intervention skills to deal with both
personal and vocational concerns, they turned to Carl Rogers’s nondirective

406

Career Development and Counseling

approach. Currently, counselors often augment trait-and-factor interpretation methods with attention to (a) the working alliance, (b) contextual and
cultural factors and individual differences that have an impact on decision making, (c) developmental stages, (d) economic and social realities, and
(e) personal issues. Although career counseling has evolved and changed, the
philosophy of the Minnesota Point of View—assessment of client strengths
and weaknesses and the use of test results to make predictions that will
garner satisfaction and success for the client—remains relevant.
Career counseling approaches that incorporate assessment of multiple
constructs allow counselors to more fully understand the client than do
approaches that incorporate only interest assessment. Comparing results
from ability and personality tests with results from interest and value/needs
measures allows the counselor to better understand what motivates the client
(interests and values), how the client interacts with others (personality), and
the level of complexity at which the client is able to function (abilities). Also,
once clients have examined their scores on an interest inventory, they may
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make a decision because the possibilities, based on interests
alone, are many and varied. Clients often ﬁnd it helpful at this point to have
additional information to help them begin to narrow their choices. Having
data on abilities, personality, and values provides additional information to
determine the best P-E ﬁt for the client.
In terms of reﬁning choices, a consideration of abilities helps to determine
the level of occupational and educational complexity that the individual
will be able to successfully pursue. Understanding personality can provide
direction within an organization. For example, a person who scores low on
measures of responsibility and assertiveness probably will not make a good
manager. In the same way, understanding needs and values can help persons
understand how they ﬁt into a work environment. A person scoring high on
the need for independence may not appreciate a job with close supervision
from a superior. Likewise, those who value achievement will probably want
to work in a challenging job.
Unfortunately, ﬁnancial and time constraints often limit assessment to
vocational interests. In those instances, counselors will ﬁnd it useful to use
past behaviors to help them understand the client more fully. For example,
counselors can gather information on performance in coursework and on
achievement tests to estimate abilities. They can inquire about what is
important for an individual to have in a job, an employer, a work setting,
and coworkers to estimate values, and they can ask clients to describe
how they interact with others on the job, within their family, and with
friends and strangers to better understand their clients’ personality and the
environments in which they excel.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

407

Selecting an Interest Inventory
Which inventory to use in career counseling depends to some extent on
the age of the client and the resources of the counseling agency. Younger
clients’ (e.g., freshmen and sophomores in high school) interests may not be
developed sufﬁciently to have differentiated scores on occupation-speciﬁc
scales such as those that appear on the SII or CISS. For younger clients, then,
the most useful information probably will come from higher-order scales
such as those found on Holland’s SDS, the Orientation Scales of the CISS,
or General Occupational Themes of the SII. For older high school students,
college students, and adults, scales that measure interests relative to speciﬁc
occupations (i.e., Occupational Scales) are useful.
The SDS is one of the more economical interest inventories available to
consumers primarily because the instrument can be self-scored. Instruments
like the CISS and SII, which have a multitude of scores as well as interpretive
comments presented on the proﬁle, must be machine-scored, which increases
the price of these instruments. The trade-off, then, is the reasonable cost of
the SDS versus the more detailed information provided by the CISS and SII.
Where cost and access are important considerations, the Interest Proﬁler,
available free on the O*NET website (http://www.onetcenter.org/IP.html)
is another possibility. The Interest Proﬁler is a relatively brief, rudimentary
interest measure that provides a summary of the test taker’s Holland types.
Preparing to Use Interest Inventories
To prepare to use interest inventories, counselors should study the inventory’s manual. Typically, test manuals include information on the purpose
of the inventory and provide an overview of the testing materials. Most
manuals describe the way in which the scales were constructed, normed,
and standardized; report evidence of reliability and validity; note inventory
limitations; and offer suggestions for the use and interpretation of the scale
scores. The manual also will provide information that helps the counselor
know what the scale names mean and what scores are considered high,
average, or low.
Administering an Interest Inventory
Interest inventories may be administered either individually or in group
settings. The traditional paper-and-pencil interest inventory format still is
available, but computer-administered versions are increasingly popular.
Regardless of the administration format or setting, a standardized introduction should be given to orient the client to the testing expectations. Also, for

408

Career Development and Counseling

clients who may have difﬁculty understanding the items, it generally is
permissible to provide them with deﬁnitions or explanations to ensure that
they understand the items.
Preparing to Interpret an Interest Inventory
Prior to meeting with the client to interpret the test results, counselors
should review the proﬁle. This review should include checking validity
indices that may indicate some problem with test administration or the
client’s responses and examining the proﬁle for patterns of interests that
emerge across various sets of scales. In addition to providing an assessment
of work-related interests, interest inventories also often tap leisure interests
and preferences for various types of work, recreational activities, and living
environments. Therefore, as the counselor prepares for the interpretation
session, it is useful to think broadly about how the client may satisfy the
interests that are reported on the interest inventory proﬁle. During the
session, clients then can be encouraged to think about ways in which they
can satisfy their interests across the many roles in their lives (e.g., worker,
family member, leisurite, friend, volunteer) (Hansen, 2000).
Interpreting an Interest Inventory
Interest inventories help clients identify their interests in an efﬁcient manner,
and during the interpretation session, the scores are used to stimulate
discussion about occupations and activities that match their interests. The
results also provide a framework for stimulating discussion about options
that clients may not have considered in the past and about ways in which
some interests may be better satisﬁed through leisure or volunteer activities
than through the world of work. The client–counselor exchange, in turn, is
used to verify working hypotheses.
Although it may be tempting to view test interpretation as a discrete
activity within career counseling, research has shown that college student
clients tend to recall very little about the speciﬁc proﬁle results reported
to them 1 year earlier (Hansen, Kozberg, & Goranson, 1994). Therefore, the
interpretation of test results should be integrated into the overall counseling
process. Also, regardless of the interest inventory that has been administered,
the exploration of occupational and educational options can be enhanced by
using materials tied to Holland’s RIASEC coding scheme (e.g., Gottfredson
& Holland, 1996; Rosen, Holmberg, & Holland, 1994). A set of speciﬁc steps
for interpreting interest inventories appears at the end of this chapter.
The counselor needs to be knowledgeable about the meaning of scale
scores to provide the client with accurate information about the results and

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

409

to convey the nuances of the results. Understanding the nuts and bolts of
test construction and knowing the evidence of reliability and validity for
an instrument provide a necessary foundation for proper test interpretation.
However, counseling skills also are required for interpreting test results, and
common intervention techniques such as establishing rapport, developing a
positive working alliance, and providing a safe and supportive atmosphere
are just as important during test interpretation as during any other counseling
session. Communication skills also are important. Throughout the process,
the counselor is striving to facilitate the client’s active involvement in
understanding the results and relating them to the goals of counseling.
In subsequent counseling sessions, clients often ﬁnd it useful to return to
their proﬁles to refresh their memory, clarify results, and integrate the test
scores with the exploration process and their counseling goals.
RESPONSIBLE USE OF TESTS
Most test publishers require test purchasers to verify their educational background, training, and experience and will sell interest inventories only to
those who are qualiﬁed. Generally, a master’s degree, including coursework
in psychological testing and measurement, is the minimum requirement.
Effective use and interpretation of interest inventories also requires training
in current testing issues, such as the effect of gender differences on interest
scores and interpretation and the fair use of interest inventories with diverse
racial, ethnic, and cultural groups. Most test publishers have made concerted efforts to ensure that the basic elements of interest inventories—the
items—are relevant for most test takers. These efforts include revising items
so that the wording does not suggest in any way that some activities or
occupations are not appropriate for all groups and constructing scales that
reﬂect activities that appeal to multiple groups. Also, efforts have been made
to collect evidence of validity for test scores for diverse populations and to
better understand the nature of differences in interests between women and
men and among various cultural groups. Nonetheless, counselors still need
to be aware that cultural background and contextual variables may have an
impact on test results.
Gender Differences in Interests
Gender differences in interests have been studied throughout the history of
interest measurement, and the results of these studies have guided inventory
development. Women and men do report differential levels of interests in
some areas—most notably, women express more artistic and social interests,
and men express more realistic and investigative interests (Su, Rounds, &

410

Career Development and Counseling

Armstrong, 2009). Numerous studies have pointed to these gender differences in interests as an explanation for the underrepresentation of girls and
women in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) ﬁelds
(Ceci, Williams, & Barnett, 2009; Schmidt, 2011; Su et al., 2009).
Some have suggested that the differences in interests between women and
men will disappear as the barriers to occupational entry in nontraditional
occupations fall. Yet, studies that have examined gender differences in
interests at both the item and scale score level over a 50-year period suggest
that gender differences in interests are quite stable and robust (Hansen, 1988).
However, a recent study (Bubany & Hansen, 2011) that used cross-temporal
meta-analysis to examine interest stability across birth cohorts suggests some
convergence in the interests of female and male college students over the past
30 years. Speciﬁcally, gender differences in Investigative, Enterprising, and
Conventional interests decreased signiﬁcantly. However, gender differences
in Realistic, Artistic, and Social interests did not decrease. E. K. Strong (1943)
was among the ﬁrst to attempt to develop combined-gender occupational
scales. However, he concluded (as have many researchers following in his
footsteps) that separate-gender scales were more effective for counseling.
This conclusion is especially true for the use of interest inventories with
women or men who have interests that are nontraditional for their gender
(e.g., women who are interested in farming and men who are interested in
clerical work). Nonetheless, some interest inventories do report scores that
are based only on combined-gender samples.
Another strategy used by test publishers to reduce gender bias in interest
inventories occurs at the item level. Language that infers that a job or activity
is appropriate for only one gender or the other has been eliminated from
extant inventory items (as well as interpretive materials). For some interest
inventories, new items have been developed that have similar appeal to
women and men to replace items that were more stereotypic for one gender
or the other. In spite of efforts to develop gender-fair interest inventories,
within the broad career counseling context, women and men still may feel
restricted in their occupational and educational choices and, therefore, may
need support and encouragement from their counselors to explore broadly
(see Heppner, Chapter 7, this volume).
Cultural Differences in Interests
The relevance of interests across cultures has been examined most often
by looking statistically at the relations among Holland’s interest types
across racial or ethnic groups. Often this focus intersects with social class,
but relatively little work has focused speciﬁcally on interests and social
class. Several large-scale studies using the SII and the UNIACT show that

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

411

the intercorrelations among the six types ﬁt Holland’s circular model for
African American, Asian American, Native American, Mexican American,
and European American participants (Fouad, Harmon, & Borgen, 1997).
This suggests that inventories based on Holland’s RIASEC model have
validity for diverse populations. Nonetheless, the use of interest inventories with racial, ethnic, and culturally diverse clients may be enhanced
if counselors strive to understand the values and attitudes of other cultures and also are aware of their own values and possible biases and
stereotypes.
Most of the research exploring the usefulness of interest inventories with
ethnic and racial groups has been concurrent validity studies used to assess
the extent to which scores on the proﬁles predict occupational entry or choice
of a college major. Generally, American Indian, African American, Asian
American, and Latina/Latino students score high on scales representing the
occupations or college majors they have chosen at about the same rate as
Anglo American students (about 55% to 75%), and the hit rates substantially
exceed chance hit rates (about 20% to 25%) (Hansen & Lee, 2007; Haviland
& Hansen, 1987; Holland, 1997). Studies using multiple regression (Diemer,
Wang, & Smith, 2010) and multidimensional scaling (Tang, 2009) also have
shown that interests signiﬁcantly predict college major choices for American
Indian/Alaska Native, Asian Hawaiian/Paciﬁc Islander, Black/African
American, and Latina/Latino youth who attended high school in low-income
neighborhoods and for students from the northeast areas of China.
One concern with most interest inventories is that the scales are constructed using samples composed primarily of Anglo Americans. Ideally,
then, normative data would be made available by the publisher for various
racial, ethnic, and cultural groups. The reality, however, is that this goal is
rarely achieved. In lieu of these data, good counseling practice is essential.
Another concern is that most interest inventories are administered in English.
Clients who do not speak English, or for whom English may be a second
language, may not understand the meanings or nuances of some items or
the labels for some scales. The best practice for counselors is to collaborate
with clients to gain an understanding of cultural inﬂuences and at the same
time to be aware of individual differences that may have an impact on
the career decision-making process (see Fouad & Kantamneni, Chapter 8,
this volume).
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE: STEPS FOR INTERPRETING
AN INTEREST INVENTORY
Although counselors will want to develop their own style for interpreting interest inventories—one that blends test interpretation with their

412

Career Development and Counseling

theoretical approach to counseling interventions and to career development and decision making—several basic steps can be incorporated into
most interpretations. The order certainly can be changed to individualize the
counseling process, but the steps outlined here offer one format frequently
used by counselors.
• Review the purpose for taking the inventory and looking at the results.
• Ask for any reactions the client may have had to taking the inventory.
• Remind the client that interest inventories do not measure abilities.
• Ask if the client can predict two or three high scores—usually for the

scales that measure the Holland types.
• Brieﬂy describe how the scale scores were derived.
• Explain the way in which the scales are normed and standardized, and

describe the sample to which the client is being compared.
• Explain the meaning of numerical scores and interpretive comments.
• Describe what the scales mean, and give an example of one or two items

on the scale.
• Ask the client for reactions to the scores (i.e., how accurate is the picture

that the scores paint for the client).
• Ask clients to clarify how they satisfy each of their interests (e.g., work,

recreation, social activities), and encourage integration of the results
with past and current activities to help understand the results.
• Look for patterns across the proﬁle and ponder ways in which interests
in various activities might be combined into a job or career.
• Identify additional related educational or occupational possibilities not
reported on the proﬁle that might also satisfy the client’s interests.
• Develop a plan with the client for the next steps to take in the career
exploration process.
• Ask the client to summarize the results at the end of the session, and
allow time to discuss any misunderstandings.
CONCLUSIONS
Longitudinal outcome research has shown that students who receive a
basic interest inventory interpretation tend to participate more in career
exploration activities than do students who have not taken an interest
inventory and had it interpreted (Randahl, Hansen, & Haverkamp, 1993).
Incorporating interest inventories into career counseling models provides
clients and counselors with information that will assist clients to develop
their potential. This is true in career counseling as well as in selection and
placement uses of interest inventories. Whether the goal is to enhance an
individual’s satisfaction with the job or the organization’s satisfaction with

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

413

the individual, knowledge of interests is one component in career counseling
that can help meet both of these goals.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, P. L., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests.
Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 219–245.
Armstrong, P. I., & Rounds, J. B. (2008). Vocational psychology and individual
differences. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology
(pp. 375–391). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Armstrong, P. I., & Rounds, J. B. (2010). Integrating individual differences in career
measurement: The Atlas Model of Individual Differences and the Strong Ring.
Career Development Quarterly, 59, 143–153.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Gupta, R. (2003). Meta-analysis of the relationship
between the ﬁve-factor model of personality and Holland’s occupational types.
Personnel Psychology, 56, 45–74.
Betsworth, D. G., Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Cooper, C. R., Grotevant, H. D., Hansen, J.
C., Scarr, S., & Weinberg, R. A. (1994). Genetic and environmental inﬂuences on
vocational interests assessed using adoptive and biological families and twins
reared apart and together. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 44, 263–278.
Betz, N. E., Borgen, F. H., & Harmon, L. W. (1996). Skills Conﬁdence Inventory:
Applications and technical guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Bubany, S. T., & Hansen, J. C. (2011). Birth cohort change in the vocational interests
of female and male college students. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 78, 59–67.
Campbell, D. P. (1991). Manual for the Campbell Leadership index. Minneapolis, MN:
Pearson Assessments.
Campbell, D. P., Hyne, S. A., & Nilsen, D. L. (1992). Manual for the Campbell Interest
and Skill Survey. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments.
Ceci, S. J., Williams, W. M., & Barnett, S. M. (2009). Women’s under-representation
in science: Sociocultural and biological considerations. Psychological Bulletin, 135,
218–261.
Consulting Psychologists Press. (2004). Strong Interest Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:
Author.
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Depue, R. A., & Collins, P. F. (1999). Neurobiology of the structure of personality.
Dopamine facilitation of incentive motivation and extraversion. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 28, 313–395.
Diemer, M. A., Wang, Q., & Smith, A. V. (2010). Vocational interests and prospective
college majors among youth of color and poverty. Journal of Career Assessment, 18,
97–110.
Dik, B. J., & Hansen, J. C. (2008). Following passionate interests to well-being. Journal
of Career Assessment, 16, 86–100.
Dik, B. J., & Hansen, J. C. (2011). Moderation of P-E ﬁt: Job satisfaction relations.
Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 35–50.

414

Career Development and Counseling

Dik, B. J., Hu, R. S. C., & Hansen, J. C. (2007). An empirical test of the Modiﬁed
C Index and SII, O*NET, and DHOC occupational code classiﬁcations. Journal of
Career Assessment, 15, 279–300.
Donnay, D. A. C., Morris, M., Schaubut, N., Thompson, R., Harmon, L. W., Hansen, J.
C., . . . Hammer, A. L. (2005). Strong Interest Inventory manual: Research, development,
and strategies for interpretation. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists.
Finn, S. E. (2007). In our clients’ shoes: Theory and techniques of therapeutic assessment.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Finn, S. E., & Martin, H. (in press). Therapeutic assessment: Using psychological testing as brief therapy. In K. Geisinger and Associates (Eds.), Handbook of testing and
assessment in psychology. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Fouad, N. A., Harmon, L. W., & Borgen, F. H. (1997). The structure of interests
in employed male and female members of U.S. racial/ethnic minority and nonminority groups. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 44, 339–345.
Gasser, C. E., Larson, L. M., & Borgen, F. H. (2007). Concurrent validity of the 2005
Strong Interest Inventory: An examination of gender and major ﬁeld of study.
Journal of Career Assessment, 15, 23–43.
Gottfredson, G. D., & Holland, J. L. (1996). Dictionary of Holland occupational codes.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent
(Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp.
71–100). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hansen, J. C. (1988). Changing interests: Myth or reality? Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 37, 137–150.
Hansen, J. C. (2000). Interpretation of the Strong Interest Inventory. In C. E.
Watkins Jr., & V. L. Campbell (Eds.), Testing and assessment in counseling practice
(pp. 227–262). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hansen, J. C. (in press). Person–environment ﬁt approach to cultivating meaning.
In B. J. Dik, Z. S. Byrne, & M. F. Steger (Eds.), Purpose and meaning in the work place.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hansen, J. C., & Campbell, D. P. (1985). Manual for the SVIB-SCII (4th ed.). Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Hansen, J. C., & Dik, B. J. (2005). Evidence of 12-year predictive and concurrent
validity for SII Occupational Scale scores. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67, 365– 378.
Hansen, J. C., Kozberg, J. G., & Goranson, D. (1994). Accuracy of student recall
of Strong Interest Inventory results 1 year after interpretation. Measurement and
Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 26, 235–242.
Hansen, J. C., & Lee, W. V. (2007). Evidence of concurrent validity of SII scores for
Asian American college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 15, 1–11.
Hansen, J. C., & Leuty, M. E. (2007). Evidence of validity for the Skill Scale scores of
the Campbell Interest and Skill Survey. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 71, 23–44.
Hansen, J. C., & Neuman, J. L. (1999). Evidence of concurrent prediction of the
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey (CISS) for college major selection. Journal of
Career Assessment, 7, 239–247.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Interests

415

Hansen, J. C., & Scullard, M. G. (2002). Psychometric evidence for the Leisure
Interest Questionnaire and analyses of the structure of leisure interests. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 49, 331–341.
Hansen, J. C., Sullivan, B. A., & Luciana, M. (2011). A social neuroscientiﬁc model of
vocational behavior. Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 216–227.
Hansen, J. C., & Swanson, J. (1983). The effect of stability of interests on the
predictive and concurrent validity of the SCII for college majors. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 30, 194–201.
Hansen, J. C., & Ton, M. (2001). Using a person–environment ﬁt framework to
predict satisfaction and motivation in work and marital roles. Journal of Career
Assessment, 9, 315–331.
Harms, P. D., Roberts, B. W., & Winter, D. (2006). Becoming the Harvard man:
Person–environment ﬁt, personality development, and academic success. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 851–865.
Haviland, M. L., & Hansen, J. C. (1987). Criterion validity of the Strong-Campbell
Interest Inventory for American Indian college students. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 19, 196–201.
Holland, J. L. (1975). Manual for the Vocational Preference Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists.
Holland, J. L. (1985). Self-Directed Search professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1994). Self-Directed Search user’s guide. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Lubinski, D. (2000). Scientiﬁc and social signiﬁcance of assessing individual differences: ‘‘Sinking shafts at a few critical points.’’ In S. T. Fiske (Ed.), Annual review
of psychology 51 (pp. 405–444). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Morey, L. C., Lowmaster, S. E., & Hopwood, C. J. (2010). A pilot study of manual assisted cognitive therapy with a therapeutic assessment augmentation for
borderline personality disorder. Psychiatry Research, 178, 531–535.
Ougrin, D., Ng, A. V., & Low, J. (2008). Therapeutic assessment based on cognitiveanalytic therapy for young people presenting with self-harm: Pilot study. Psychiatric Bulletin, 32, 423–426.
Pendergrass, L. A., Hansen, J. C., Neuman, J. L., & Nutter, K. J. (2003). Examination
of the concurrent validity of the scores from the CISS for student-athlete college
major selection: A brief report. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 35, 212–218.
Porter, S. R., & Umbach, P. D. (2006). College major choice: An analysis of P-E ﬁt.
Research in Higher Education, 47, 429–449.
Poston, J. M., & Hanson, W. M. (2010). Meta-analysis of psychological assessment as
a therapeutic intervention. Psychological Assessment, 22, 203–212.
Randahl, G. J., Hansen, J. C., & Haverkamp, B. E. (1993). Instrumental behaviors
following test administration and interpretation. Exploration validity of the Strong
Interest Inventory. Journal of Counseling and Development, 71, 435–439.

416

Career Development and Counseling

Rosen, D., Holmberg, K., & Holland, J. L. (1994). The educational opportunities ﬁnder.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Rottinghaus, P. J., Lindley, L. D., Green, M. A., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Educational
aspirations: The contribution of personality, self-efﬁcacy and interests. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 61, 1–19.
Rounds, J. B. (1990). The comparative and combined ability of work value and
interest data in career counseling with adults. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37,
32–45.
Savickas, M. L., Tabor, B. J., & Spokane, A. R. (2002). Convergent and discriminant
validity of ﬁve interest inventories. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61, 139–184.
Schmidt, F. L. (2011). A theory of sex differences in technical aptitude and some
supporting evidence. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 560–573.
Staggs, G. D., Larson, L. M., & Borgen, F. H. (2007). Convergence of personality and
interests: Meta-analysis of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire and
the Strong Interest Inventory. Journal of Career Assessment, 15, 423–445.
Strong, E. K., Jr., (1927a). Vocational guidance of engineers. Industrial Psychology
Monthly, 11, 291–298.
Strong, E. K., Jr., (1927b). Vocational Interest Blank. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Strong, E. K., Jr., (1935). Permanence of vocational interests. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 25, 336–344.
Strong, E. K., Jr., (1943). Vocational interests of men and women. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Su, R., Rounds, J., & Armstrong, P. I. (2009). Men and things, women and people:
A meta-analysis of sex differences in interests. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 859–884.
Sullivan, B. A., & Hansen, J. C. (2004a). Evidence of construct validity of the interest
scales on the Campbell Interest and Skill Survey. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65,
179–202.
Sullivan, B. A., & Hansen, J. C. (2004b). Mapping associations between interests
and personality: Toward a conceptual understanding of individual differences in
vocational behavior. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51, 287–298.
Swanson, J. L., & Hansen, J. C. (1988). Stability of vocational interests over four-year,
eight-year, and twelve-year intervals. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 33, 185–202.
Tellegen, A. (2000). Manual for the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Tang, M. (2009). Examining the application of Holland’s Theory to vocational
interests and choices of Chinese college students. Journal of Career Assessment, 17,
86–98.
Wise, L. L., McHenry, J. J., & Campbell, J. P. (1990). Identifying optimal predictor
composites and testing from generalizability across jobs and performance factors.
Personnel Psychology, 43, 355–366.

C H A P T E R 15

Nature, Importance, and Assessment
of Needs and Values
JAMES ROUNDS AND JING JIN

W

interpretations of what people want and
expect from work (Nord, Brief, Atieh, & Doherty, 1990). As
such, values are central to our understanding of both the meaning of work and the reasons why people work. This shared social reality
inﬂuences the type of work people design for others to do and how people
are socialized for work. Values are central to human motivation and have
a long history in psychology. Research on values can be found in many
ﬁelds in psychology, with much of the theory and research coming from
personality and social psychology and the more applied research coming
from organizational and counseling psychology. The development of work
value measures for career counseling comes from the traditional vocational
psychology emphasis on occupational choice and adjustment (Dawis, 1991).
It is generally assumed that values are related to an individual’s choice
of a career and work behavior outcomes. Values assessment represents an
opportunity to frame a client’s career-related decisions in the context of
underlying motivations. The comparisons between an individual’s values
and the rewards offered by different occupations can provide information on
what kinds of occupations to explore (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2,
this volume). How well an individual’s values ﬁt with an organization has
implications for career management strategies. Value–organization ﬁt may
inﬂuence early career success by contributing to mentoring relations, challenging career assignments, and fast-track promotion ladders (Bretz & Judge,
1994). Values assessments can have beneﬁts for both the individual and organization, as individuals can identify work values that are not sufﬁciently
rewarded and organizations can recruit employees with a close values ﬁt.
ORK VALUES ARE SHARED

417

418

Career Development and Counseling

Although work values offer potentially important information, value
measures have received less research attention than measures of other
individual differences characteristics, such as interests. Few papers have been
published on work values since the 1990s, and the topic of work values in
many career development and assessment textbooks is an afterthought. But
this situation is not conﬁned to career counseling and vocational psychology.
Rohan (2000), in a review of introductory social psychology and personality
textbooks, found no discussion of value theory in the 1990s. There are few
work value measures commercially available and fewer still with sufﬁcient
reliability and validity to be recommended for use with clients. There
are several reasons for this state of affairs. Vocational psychology from a
counseling psychology perspective has historically focused on vocational
choice for high school and college students, a population for which the
assessment emphasis has been on vocational interests (Rounds, 1990). Work
values are considered to be most applicable to individuals who have had
some experience in the workplace, an adult clientele not frequently seen
at college counseling centers. The critical loss of the work value research
programs of Super and of Dawis and Lofquist has probably also played an
important role in the decline in empirical research.
Several developments have, however, revitalized research on work values. One development is the study of values from a social-cultural approach
(Fischer, Vauclair, Fontaine, & Schwartz, 2010; Hofstede, 2001). A second
development has been the Occupational Information Network’s (O*NET;
Peterson, Mumford, Borman, Jeanneret, & Fleishman, 1999) adoption of the
Minnesota work adjustment assessment model for needs and values (Dawis
& Lofquist, 1984), providing the potential to link need and value scores to
the wide range of career-relevant information to all occupations in the U.S.
Department of Labor’s O*NET database. Finally, industrial and organizational psychology researchers have continued to advance the study of values
within work settings. This chapter highlights these recent developments and
focuses on major contributions to the study of values, the importance of
work values in career development, work value assessment strategies, and
the major work value measures used in career and organizations.
We begin with a review of the concept of needs and values, laying a
conceptual foundation for the use of value measures in career and organizational interventions. Second, we survey and deﬁne the content domain of
work values (i.e., the kinds of work values that have been studied). Because
work values have typically been studied within a person-environment ﬁt
tradition, we then describe the variety of research coming from this tradition
that supports the ways that values are applied in vocational and organizational interventions. This research includes the relations of values to work
outcomes, change and stability of work values from middle school to early

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

419

adulthood, and gender, race, and ethnic differences. We end this chapter
with a review of work value measures and suggestions for practical use of
work values in career and organizational interventions.
CONCEPTUAL ISSUES
Several conceptual distinctions can be made between needs and values, but a
close reading of the literature leads us to question some of these distinctions
when applied to the practice of career counseling. Similarly, distinctions
are made between general or life values and work values, but few studies
have examined the relations between these two types of values (Roe & Ester,
1999). This lack of research leaves open a number of important questions. Do
work values emerge from general values as individuals interact with work?
Alternatively, do work values inﬂuence general values? These questions
are similar to the issue of multiple roles and values: Do different values
become salient as a person moves from one role to another? Should general
value measures such as the Study of Values (Allport, Vernon, & Lindzey,
1970) be used in career assessment, or is it best to use work-speciﬁc value
measures such as the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire? Answers to
these questions have practical implications for assessment. Similar questions
arise from attempts to distinguish work values and vocational interests.
An understanding of the relations between them and their connection to
occupations would inﬂuence many assessment practices. What is the best
way to link the assessment of interests and values? In many cases, the
literature has no clear answers to these conceptual and practical concerns.
Needs
The concept of psychological needs in modern psychology can be traced to
Henry Murray’s (1938) person-environment, need-press theory. Murray proposed a list of psychological needs that were important to human behavior.
Needs refer to how the individual feels, behaves, or reacts. Press is deﬁned as
what the environment can do to facilitate or hinder the fulﬁllment of needs.
The combination of individual needs and environmental press can be used
to explain a wide variety of behaviors. The impact of Murray’s theory can be
seen on more recent person–environment conceptualizations of needs and
values.
Many writers have regarded needs and values as equivalent. For example,
Maslow (1954, 1959) viewed needs and values as similar, and at times
he used these terms interchangeably. Rokeach (1973), however, saw needs
as biologically derived and values as cognitive representations of those
needs subject to inﬂuence by social and institutional demands. The need
for sex, for example, is cognitively transformed such that love or intimacy

420

Career Development and Counseling

is valued as a result. Super (1962, 1995) saw needs as the manifestation
of physiological conditions related to survival. Super, like Rokeach (1973),
viewed needs as reﬁned through interactions with the environment, leading
to the development of values. The resulting values are objectives used to
satisfy needs through interest in certain activities. Super (1995) described
the needs-value–interests link as such: Valuing material things may lead
individuals to seek wealth, and people generally seek wealth through an
interest in managerial and remunerative occupations. In Super’s example,
value attainment is also linked to occupational choice, as individuals tend to
choose occupations that provide opportunities to fulﬁll values.
Much of the research on needs comes from theories of work motivation in
organizational psychology. Work motivation theories attempt to explain the
context and processes that account for an individual’s energy, direction of
effort, and maintenance of that effort in a work setting. One group of work
motivation theories is based directly on the concept of needs, appropriately
called need theories. The need theories that are most prominent in work motivation are Herzberg, Mausner, and Snyderman’s (1959) hygienes-motivators
theory, Maslow’s (1954, 1959) self-actualization theory, and Alderfer’s (1969)
existence–relatedness–growth theory. Need theories propose that needs
energize and direct an individual’s behavior toward satisfaction of those
needs. Therefore, an assessment of needs may provide important insight
into the motivational forces underlying career-related decisions.
An important contribution of need theories is the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of needs. These need theories are often viewed as taxonomies
of motivational variables. For example, Maslow classiﬁed needs into ﬁve
categories: physiological, security, social, self-esteem, and self-actualization.
Need theories were popular during the 1960s and 1970s, but interest in these
models eventually declined, probably due to a failure to obtain empirical
support (see Campbell & Pritchard, 1976). In reviewing work motivation theories, Kanfer (1991; also see Kanfer, Chen, & Pritchard, 2008) classiﬁed need
and expectancy theories together because intrinsic motives, needs, and values are hypothesized to activate and direct behavior. Expectancy/valence
theories introduced a cognitive mediation role for needs and values to
explain the process of work motivation. Kanfer criticized these approaches
for ‘‘not specifying the mediating processes by which motivational energy
is transformed and/or directed toward speciﬁc behaviors or patterns of
action’’ (p. 83). These criticisms are also applicable to life value models (e.g.,
Brown, 1996; Super, 1995).
Values
Essential to understanding work values is knowledge of value theory and
thought in social psychology. The development of values can be traced to the

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

421

philosopher Spranger’s (1928) six basic types of individuality: theoretical,
economic, aesthetic, social, political, and religious. Allport and Vernon’s
(1931) Study of Values, the ﬁrst systematic attempt to measure values, was
based on Spranger’s theory and his six basic values. For Allport, values
are ‘‘propriate’’ functioning, meaning that people are motivated to act in a
manner that is expressive of the self. A value is ‘‘a belief upon which a man
[sic] acts by preference’’ (Allport, 1961, p. 454). Much of the early research
and practice used broad value measures such as the Study of Values to assess
work-relevant values.
Since Allport, many other researchers have contributed to the broad study
of values, including concepts that are important to our current understanding
of work values. One such contribution is Rokeach’s (1973) theoretical writing
and his Value Survey, both of which renewed interest in the study of values.
As with Allport, for Rokeach values are beliefs with some means or end
of action that are judged to be desirable or undesirable. Because values
are beliefs, they can have cognitive, affective, and behavioral components.
Rokeach saw values as enduring but less stable than traits and identiﬁed
two kinds of values: instrumental and terminal. Instrumental values are
beliefs concerning desirable modes of conduct (e.g., ambitious, obedient).
Terminal values are beliefs concerning desirable end states of existence (e.g.,
comfortable life, equality). Rokeach (1973) believed that values are central to
understanding behavior. Although not taking such a broad view of values,
Brown (1996; Brown & Crace, 1996) proposed a value model to account for
human motivation that outlines the function of values in decision making
and the impact that values have on the outcome of life choices. Similar
to Rokeach, Brown and Crace deﬁned values as cognitive representations,
transformations of needs, providing standards, orienting people to desired
end states, and enduring. Compared to other deﬁnitions, they emphasized
an internal, cognitively mediated function of values as the basis of human
motivation.
Needs and values are rarely the central components of theories in vocational counseling and psychology. An exception is the theory of work
adjustment (Dawis & Lofquist, 1984; Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2,
this volume), which uses needs and values as explanatory constructs. Values in the theory of work adjustment are part of the work personality
that also includes abilities and needs. Vocational needs are reinforcing
conditions that have been found to be important to job satisfaction. Values are deﬁned in terms of vocational needs as ‘‘second-order needs’’ or
‘‘underlying common elements of needs’’ (see Dawis & Lofquist, 1984,
pp. 83–86; Dawis, 2001). Essentially, values are reference dimensions for
needs, primarily deﬁned by data reduction techniques such as factor analysis. Values can also be described in terms of work environment reinforcer

422

Career Development and Counseling

systems, reﬂecting the kinds of work reinforcers that are important for an
individual.
Super (1995) argued that vocational needs in the theory of work adjustment are similar to his values (see also Macnab & Fitzsimmons, 1987).
Operationally, this is true. The measures developed by Super (1970) and
Dawis and Lofquist (1984) use similar constructs to describe either needs or
values. When examined closely, it is evident that need items in the Minnesota
Importance Questionnaire (MIQ; Rounds, Henly, Dawis, Lofquist & Weiss,
1981) and value items in Work Values Inventory (Super, 1970) both assess
the relative importance of work outcomes to the person. The difference in
terminology is due to the origins of the theory of work adjustment. Dawis
and Lofquist drew their ideas from Schaffer’s (1953) research on job satisfaction and the behavioral tradition of Skinner (1938) with its emphasis on
reinforcement (Lofquist & Dawis, 1991), whereas Super drew his ideas from
the developmental work of Buehler (1933) and Ginzberg, Ginsburg, Axelrad,
and Herma (1951).
Schwartz (1992) provides an up-to-date summary of how values have been
conceptualized in psychology (see also Rohan, 2000). Schwartz reported that
ﬁve features of values are frequently discussed in the value literature. Values
(1) are beliefs, (2) pertain to desirable end states of behaviors, (3) guide
selection or evaluation of behaviors and events, (4) remain stable across
context and time, and (5) are ordered in terms of relative importance. Values,
therefore, are stable motivational constructs that represent broad goals and,
like traits, apply across context and time (Schwartz, 1994). Among value
researchers, Schwartz currently has the most active research program. He
has studied the structural relations of values across cultures (Fischer et al.,
2010) and the relations of values and behaviors (Bardi & Schwartz, 2003) and
has applied his theory of cultural values to work (Schwartz, 1999).
Distinctions From Related Concepts
Researchers have grappled with several conceptual issues surrounding the
deﬁnition of values, the ﬁrst of which involves the distinction between
life values and work values. Research into life values has tended to ignore
developments in the ﬁeld of work values. For example, two attempts to apply
Schwartz’s model of cultural values to the world of work fall short in their
understanding of work values (Ros, Schwartz, & Surkiss, 1999; Schwartz,
1999). Ros and colleagues (1999) used Schwartz’s 10 cultural values to derive
only four work values (intrinsic, extrinsic, social, and mixed), a number that
is far smaller than what is found in most work value taxonomies.
Work value research, however, has clearly been inﬂuenced by mainstream
studies on life values (Dawis, 1991; Ronen, 1994). Elizur and Sagie (1999),

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

423

for example, began with a multifaceted deﬁnition of life and work values
and then generated both life and work value items. They reported that
the structure within work and life domains was similar but that life and
work values occupied two distinct regions in a three-dimensional conical
structure. Life values were located at the base of the cone and work values
at the top, suggesting that context is important for values assessment.
One interesting issue that emerges from this research is the notion of
compensatory models: Can fulﬁllment of a value through work compensate
for its nonfulﬁllment in other life situations, or vice versa? Such value
compensation has potentially important implications for career counseling,
as clients may choose from different roles and environments to achieve a
sense of value fulﬁllment in their lives. Research that is applicable to the
life and work role distinction involves conﬂicts between work and family
demands. Perrewe and Hochwarter (2001), for example, have proposed a
model to capture work and family values as they relate to work–family
conﬂict and outcomes. Studies examining the interrelations between work
and life values are an emerging area of research, leaving this topic open for
additional research and the emergence of new approaches.
The second issue, especially important to career counseling, is how needs,
values, and interests are distinct but interrelated concepts. Super (1995)
deﬁned interests as preferences for activities in which individuals expect to
attain or satisfy their needs and values. An interest, then, is one of the many
manifestations of a value. For example, altruism (the value of helping others)
leads a person to prefer social occupations (i.e., an interest in work where
there will be an opportunity to help others). However, pairing values and
interests is rarely this simple because values can often be linked to several
different interest areas. For example, the value of achievement can be linked
to investigative, artistic, and enterprising interests. A more sophisticated
application would link a pattern of values and needs to different interest
areas (Armstrong, Day, McVay, & Rounds, 2008). Therefore, a critical issue
in the use of values and other assessment measures in career counseling
is the ability to link together information from different sources to create a
multifaceted picture of the individual and relevant career choices.
Dawis (1991) reviewed the conceptual deﬁnitions of interest and values
and concluded that distinguishing between values and interests is difﬁcult
at the conceptual level, leading applied psychologists to prefer operational
deﬁnitions. From an operational point of view, interests involve liking and
disliking, and values involve importance and unimportance. This perspective
makes it easy to distinguish between value and interest measures: Value
measures ask individuals to rate the importance of items, whereas interest
measures ask individuals to rate their liking of items. However, from a
counseling standpoint, the lack of a clear conceptual distinction suggests

424

Career Development and Counseling

that values and interests may be intertwined for many clients who are
making career-related decisions.
CONTENT DOMAIN OF VALUES
A key to the study and assessment of values is to decide what values to
measure and how these values are interrelated. To develop a measure of
values or to evaluate an existing measure, researchers need to address three
questions: What are the substantive contents (deﬁnition) of values? How
comprehensive is the sample of values generated by the deﬁnition? How are
the relations among values structured? We review three research programs
and describe how these programs address these questions. The research
programs reviewed are Dawis and Lofquist (1984), Super (Super & Sverko,
1995), and Schwartz (1992).
Dawis and Lofquist’s Theory of Work Adjustment
In the theory of work adjustment, the vocational needs measured by the
Minnesota Importance Questionnaire (MIQ; Rounds et al., 1981) are grouped
into six work values, creating a hierarchical taxonomy (see Table 15.1). In
this model, values are conceptualized as reference dimensions and latent
variables for the description of needs. Studies of the factor structure of the
20 vocational needs in the MIQ have yielded a six-dimensional structure of
work values. The six values can also be described in terms of work rewards
that can satisfy the cluster of needs. The work environment descriptions for
the six values are:
Achievement—an environment that encourages accomplishment.
Comfort—an environment that is comfortable and nonstressful.
Status—an environment that provides recognition and prestige.
Altruism—an environment that fosters harmony with and service to others.
Safety—an environment that is predictable.
Autonomy—an environment that stimulates initiative.
Dawis and Lofquist have also conceptualized three bipolar value dimensions: Achievement versus Comfort, Altruism versus Status, and Safety
versus Autonomy. These dimensions are crossed with three types of rewards:
self (achievement, autonomy), social (altruism, status), and environment
(comfort, safety). The resulting structure graphically represents these opposing sets of values and three major classes of rewards.
This six-value structure was ﬁrst identiﬁed in factor analyses of MIQ data in
separate samples of 3,033 employed workers, 1,621 vocational rehabilitation

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

425

Table 15.1
Dawis and Lofquist (1984) 6 Work Values and 21 Needs
Work Value

Need

Item

Achievement

Ability utilization
Achievement

I could do something that makes use of my abilities
The job could give me a feeling of accomplishment

Comfort

Activity
Independence
Variety
Compensation

I could be busy all the time
I could work alone on the job
I could do something different each day
My pay would compare well with that of other
workers
The job could provide for steady employment
The job would have good working conditions

Security
Working conditions
Status

Advancement
Recognition
Authority
Social status

The job would provide an opportunity for
advancement
I could get the recognition for the work I do
I could tell people what to do
I could be ‘‘somebody’’ in the community

Altruism

Co-workers
Social service
Moral values

My co-workers would be easy to make friends with
I could do things for other people
I could do the work without feeling that it is morally
wrong

Safety

Company policies
Supervision-human
Supervision-tech

The company would administer its policies fairly
My boss would back up the workers with top
management
My boss would train the workers well

Autonomy
Creativity
Responsibility

I could plan my work with little supervision
I could try out some of my own ideas
I could make decisions on my own

Autonomy

Source: A Psychological Theory of Work Adjustment, by R. V. Dawis and L. H. Lofquist, 1984,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

clients, 419 college students, and 285 vocational-technical students (Gay,
Weiss, Hendel, Dawis, & Lofquist, 1971). This same six-factor structure was
replicated across eight sex-by-age samples of 9,377 vocational rehabilitation
clients (Lofquist & Dawis, 1978). Recently, the MIQ was revised for the
O*NET (see Gore, Leuwerke, & Kelly, Chapter 18, this volume), producing
the Work Importance Proﬁler and Work Importance Locator (WIP and WIL;
McCloy et al., 1999b, 1999c). In the development of the computerized form
of the WIP, exploratory and conﬁrmatory factor analyses were conducted
to evaluate the six-factor work values model. Results provided moderate
support for Dawis and Lofquist’s model, although the MIQ and WIP ﬁt
a seven-factor model better than the six-factor model. The seven-factor

426

Career Development and Counseling

structure is similar to the six-factor structure, with the critical difference being
that the Comfort value splits into Internal Comfort (Activity, Independence,
and Variety) and External Comfort (Compensation, Security, and Working
Conditions). In practice, the six-factor work value model (with a single
Comfort value) continues to be used when presenting results to career
counseling clients.
Super’s Theory of Career Development
Much of Super’s ﬁnal research on work values came from the Work Importance Study (WIS; Super & Sverko, 1995). One objective of the WIS was to
investigate the relative importance of work compared to other activities and
to study the rewards that youth and adults seek in their major life roles across
cultures. In a series of studies (see Ferreira-Marques & Miranda, 1995), decisions were made about the kinds of life and work values to assess and how to
assess them. The items composing these values scales, with the exception of
the Working Conditions Value scale, had both work- and non-work-related
items. The list of values used in the WIS is shown in Table 15.2. As expected,
many of the values (e.g., ability utilization, aesthetics, creativity) could be
attained in multiple roles and situations. Other values are tied more speciﬁcally to work roles (e.g., economics, working conditions, advancement) or to
nonwork roles (personal development, lifestyle).
Also shown in Table 15.2 are the ﬁve value orientations identiﬁed in a
principal components analysis of 18,318 participants from 10 countries: Australia, Belgium (Flanders), Canada, Croatia, Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal,
South Africa, and the United States (Sverko, 1995). Many of the participants
were students from secondary schools. The ﬁve Value Orientations (Sverko,
1995, p. 228) are:
Utilitarian Orientation—the importance of economic conditions and material career progress.
Individualistic Orientation—the importance of an autonomous way of
living.
Orientation Toward Self-Actualization—the importance of inner-oriented
goals for personal development and self-realization.
Social Orientation—the importance of social interaction.
Adventurous Orientation—the importance of risk.
In studies of the factor congruence across samples, only the Utilitarian and
Individualistic value orientations showed generalizability. Sverko (1995)
speculated that the lack of generalizability for the Self-Actualization, Social,
and Adventurous orientations may be due to intergroup differences and

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

427

Table 15.2
5 Value Orientations, 18 Work Values, and Sample Items
Orientation

Value

Sample Item

Utilitarian

Economics
Advancement
Prestige
Authority
Achievement

Have a high standard of living
Get ahead
Be admired for my knowledge and skills
Tell others what to do
Have results which show that I have done well

Individualistic

Life-style
Autonomy
(Creativity)
(Variety)

Living according to my ideas
Act on my own
Discover, develop, or design new things
Have every day different in some way from the
one before it

Self-actualization

Ability utilization
Personal development
Altruism
(Achievement)
(Aesthetics)
(Creativity)

Use my skill and knowledge
Develop as a person
Help people with problems
Have results which show that I have done well
Make life more beautiful
Discover, develop, or design new things

Social

Social Interaction
Social Relations
(Variety)
(Altruism)

Do things with other people
Be with friends
Have every day different in some way from the
one before it
Help people with problems

Risk
(Physical activity)
(Authority)

Do risky things
Get a lot of exercise
Tell others what to do

Adventurous

Note. Work values in parentheses have salient loading on more than one Orientation or do not load on
this Orientation for all samples examined. The value of Working Conditions did not have salient loadings
on the Orientations. Cultural Identity and Physical Prowess values were not included in the cross-cultural
analyses.
Source: ‘‘The Structure and Hierarchy of Values Viewed Cross-Nationally,’’ pp. 225–240, by B. Sverko,
in Life Roles, Values, and Careers: International Findings of the Work Importance Study, D. E. Super and
B. Sverko, eds., 1995, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

sampling errors. Another possible reason is that the structure of values may
differ across secondary students, college students, and adults.
Schwartz’s Circumplex Model of Values
Schwartz (1992) grouped value types according to common goals, reasoning that basic human values in all cultures would represent biological
needs, social interaction, and group functioning. Informed by values identiﬁed by previous researchers and discussed in philosophical and religious

428

Career Development and Counseling

writing, Schwartz developed and classiﬁed values into 10 motivational types,
assumed to represent the range of values found across cultures:
Power—social status, prestige, control or dominance
Achievement—personal success through competence according to social
standards
Hedonism—pleasure or sensuous gratiﬁcation for oneself
Stimulation—excitement, novelty, challenge
Self-direction—independence of thought and action, creating, exploring
Universalism—understanding, tolerance, protection of all people and
nature
Benevolence—preserving and enhancing the welfare of people
Tradition—respect and commitment to cultural or religious customs
Conformity—restraint of actions and impulses that may upset or harm
others or violate social norms
Security—safety and stability of society, relationships, and self
A key aspect of Schwartz’s value theory is the structural relations among
values. The 10 values are organized according to the idea that the pursuit
of a value has consequences that can be congruent with, or in conﬂict with,
other values. For example, the pursuit of conformity may conﬂict with the
pursuit of self-direction in cases where both values are important to the
individual. The values are arranged in a circular fashion, beginning with
Power and ending with Security, portraying the patterns of congruency and
conﬂict. Conﬂicting values are opposite on the circle and congruent values
are adjacent. Along the perimeter, the distance between any two values is a
measure of the similarity of the motivations expressed by the value; those
that are closer are more similar in motivation. Schwartz’s model, with its
emphasis on the properties of a circumplex, is similar to Holland’s (1997)
vocational interest circle and may eventually have important implications
for counseling.
Comparison of Value Classiﬁcations
How comprehensive and similar are the value taxonomies? To answer
this question, we inspected the need and value deﬁnitions and items of
two classiﬁcations—Dawis and Lofquist, and Super—and then matched
similar values. The results of this evaluation lead to the taxonomy shown
in Table 15.3, which illustrates their similarity to one another. For example,
both classiﬁcations have a value that emphasizes the importance of an
environment that provides recognition and prestige. Dawis and Lofquist’s
label for the value is Status, and Super’s label is Utilitarian.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

429

Table 15.3
Comparison of Similar Categories in Dawis and Lofquist’s (1984)
Work Values/Needs and Super’s (Super & Sverko, 1995) Work
Orientations/Values
Dawis/Lofquist
Achievement
Ability utilization
Achievement
Autonomy
Creativity
Responsibility
Autonomy

Status
Advancement
Recognition
Authority
Social status
Altruism
Co-workers
Social service
Moral values

Super
Self-actualization
Ability utilization
Individualistic
Creativity
Autonomy
Personal development
Life-style
Aesthetics
Variety
Utilitarian
Advancement
Achievement
Authority
Prestige
Economics
Social
Social relations
Altruism
Social interaction

Comfort
Security
Compensation
Working conditions
Activity
Independence
Variety
Safety
Company policies and practices
Supervision—human resources
Supervision—technical

Working conditions

Adventurous
Risk
Physical activity

There is considerable overlap among value classiﬁcations listed in
Table 15.3, with Dawis and Lofquist having the most comprehensive work
value system. Super does not include organizational values similar to
Dawis and Lofquist’s Safety value. It is surprising that Super’s classiﬁcation
includes only one value—working conditions—in the category that Dawis

430

Career Development and Counseling

and Lofquist label Comfort. Super’s classiﬁcation, however, contains
general values (e.g., Personal Development) that are not necessarily tied
to a work setting but that do allow for a values assessment across other
environments. But a comparison with Schwartz’s model indicates that
several life values are missing from Super’s system, such as Hedonism,
Universalism, Benevolence, Tradition, and Conformity.
Nord and colleagues (1990) suggested that models of work values are
deﬁcient because they omit several critical elements individuals might want
from work (also see, Lyons, Higgins, & Duxbury, 2010). These include
spiritual dimensions, the relationship between producers and customers,
and the nature of the product relative to its ability to satisfy important human
needs. It might be noted, however, that Dawis and Lofquist’s Moral Values,
in the Altruism category, partially addresses the spiritual dimension and the
nature of the product dimension. Super’s Altruism, contained in the Social
category, may partially represent the producer and customer relationship
dimension. Similarly, several of the values identiﬁed by Schwartz (1996) seem
to ﬁt in Nord and colleagues’ omitted categories, including Universalism,
Benevolence, and Tradition.
The question of which taxonomy is most representative of the domain of
values depends partly on the area of research interest or clinical application.
Schwartz (1992) has the most comprehensive set of life values, making this
taxonomy an appropriate choice for use in general investigations. Dawis
and Lofquist’s taxonomy seems to be the best available description of work
values and would be the most appropriate for exploring career development
issues or other aspects of the world of work. Nevertheless, more study of the
domain of work values is necessary before researchers and practitioners can
claim to be measuring the full spectrum of values relevant to people’s work
lives. Additional research is also needed to clarify the relations between
work and life values.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
Person–Environment Fit Perspective
Research has been concerned with how work values and work environments
are related to outcomes. These relations are usually studied from a personenvironment ﬁt (P-E) perspective, in which various forms of P-E ﬁt have
been studied, including person-vocation, person-job, person-organization,
and person-group (Kristof-Brown & Guay, 2010). A large body of research
has found that the correspondence or compatibility between individual
attributes (such as needs and values) and characteristics of the environment
(such as job demands or organizational culture) is related to a variety
of work-related outcomes (Ostroff & Judge, 2007; Kristof-Brown & Guay,

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

431

2010). Work value measures are designed to measure the importance of
work outcomes expected to be related to satisfaction. It is not surprising,
then, that work values and value-environment ﬁt have been consistently
found to predict job satisfaction (Dawis, 1991; Kristof, 1996; Locke, 1976;
Ronen, 1994). Research has expanded beyond the traditional work outcome
of job satisfaction. Studies have linked value-environment ﬁt with several
other outcomes as well, such as career choice (Judge & Bretz, 1992; Young
& Hurlic, 2007), career satisfaction and occupational commitment (Cable &
DeRue, 2002), and career success (Ballout, 2007; Bretz & Judge, 1994).
Recently, researchers have used meta-analysis to summarize various forms
of P-E value congruence and work outcomes. Meta-analytic studies have
shown that value correspondence relates positively to organizational commitment and negatively to turnover intentions. These meta-analyses have
also reported positive relations between value congruence and job performance, and negative relations with work withdrawal behaviors and turnover
decisions (Arthur, Bell, Villado, & Doverspike, 2006; Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, & Johnson, 2005; Verquer, Beehr, & Wagner, 2003). Edwards and Cable
(2009) explored why value correspondence is linked to work outcomes in a
large representative sample of employed adults. According to their results,
shared values between employees and organizations promote the development of trust, mutual liking, friendship, enhanced communication, and
information exchange within the organization, which lead to positive work
outcomes.
Stability and Change
Studies of work value stability and change usually adopt two approaches:
rank-order stability and mean-level change. Rank-order stability refers to
the relative standing of individuals within a group over time (De Fruyt
et al., 2006) and is usually operationalized as a test–retest correlation. Meanlevel change refers to whether a group of people as a whole increases or
decreases on certain work value dimensions over time; it is also referred to
as absolute or normative change (Caspi & Roberts, 1999) and is measured by
mean differences. The existence of rank-order stability does not rule out the
possibility of mean-level change. In fact, both have been shown to provide
unique information in understanding stability and change.
Information on the rank-order stability of work values across the life span
comes from a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies (Jin & Rounds, 2012).
Results indicated that rank-order stability (i.e., test–retest correlation) of
values remains relatively high (ρ = .62) across four age periods (12–17.9,
18–21.9, 22–25.9, and 26–after years). The age period between 18 and 22
is a time when work values appear to be least stable; many individuals

432

Career Development and Counseling

are in college or engaged in postsecondary training, which is characterized
as information gathering and exploring various career directions (Twenge,
Campbell, Hoffman, & Lance, 2010). The college years (between 18 and 22)
are a time when work values appear to be least stable, and the level of
stability increases as individuals age, plateauing in young adulthood (after
age 22). This is consistent with arguments that values are less stable during
young adulthood, such as high school and college, when individuals are still
exploring various career directions (Twenge et al., 2010). After age 22, when
the majority of individuals have entered into the workplace, their position in
the population with respect to different values tends to stabilize and plateau,
as indicated by highest rank-order stability after 22 years old. That is, a
person with high achievement values compared to his or her age group at
22 will tend to have high achievement values when compared to same-age
peers later in life (e.g., at 30).
Although there are few longitudinal studies conducted on value stability and change beyond the age of 26, some researchers argue that values
should ﬂuctuate with added work experience. Mortimer and Lorence (1979)
proposed two possible models: the occupational-selection model and the
occupational-socialization model. In the occupational-selection model, central values and motives are formed mainly in childhood and adolescence;
people choose their jobs based on their existing traits, values, and interests; and change during adulthood is relatively minor and superﬁcial. In
the occupational-socialization model, work experience is seen as promoting
value changes over time and as molding values in the transition to adulthood. Mortimer and Lorence found support for both models. On one hand,
they found the persistence of ‘‘self-selection’’—that work values during the
college years predict the attainment of valued occupational rewards 10 years
later; on the other hand, rewarding occupational experiences were also able
to signiﬁcantly change the salience of values over time. With a national
longitudinal sample, Lindsay and Knox (1984) also found support for both
selection and socialization effects.
Mean-level change in values is often thought to be a consequence of the
maturation process and of societal or historical changes shared by a population (Helson & Moane, 1987). A normative value change toward expanding
the self and gaining more information is found during adolescence and
early adulthood, when individuals are primarily engaged in schooling. Jin
and Rounds’s (2012) meta-analysis found that intrinsic values increase and
extrinsic and status values decrease during the college (18–22) years. Sheldon (2005) has suggested that the liberal environment and the opportunity
to explore new identities in college are particularly promotive of the development of intrinsic values. Later on in adulthood (after age 22), extrinsic
and status values increase dramatically (Jin & Rounds, 2012). One possible
explanation for this shift in values is that adults take on added responsibilities

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

433

related to work, family, and civic involvement (Costa & McCrae, 2006). Such
responsibilities may prompt less ideological and more pragmatic values.
In summary, it appears that an individual’s standing within the population
is least stable during college years. During college, the population as a whole
attaches more importance to intrinsic values while de-emphasizing all the
remaining values; during the initial entry into the workforce (22–26 years
old), only extrinsic values show an increase in importance; later on, after
early adulthood years (26 years and beyond), besides the continuous increase
of extrinsic values, there was also a dramatic increase in status values. It
is important that practitioners take into account stability and change in
work values when assessing values and developing interventions across the
life span.
Gender Differences
Numerous studies have investigated gender differences in work values with
mixed and conﬂicting empirical ﬁndings. Differences in sample composition
and size may account for the conﬂicting ﬁndings (Rowe & Snizek, 1995).
To overcome these shortcomings, researchers have more recently conducted
national surveys or meta-analyses and reported their results in terms of
effect sizes, representing the magnitude of the differences in values between
men and women. The typical effect size index used in these studies is the
standardized mean difference (d), which is interpreted as the difference
between the mean of men and women in standard deviations. Thus, a d of
.50 suggests that the one group (e.g., men) scores about a half a standard
deviation higher than the other (e.g., women) on a particular value. A d
of 0.00 indicates that there is no difference between the scores of men and
women. In most reviews, d is calculated in such a way that a positive d
indicates that men score higher than women on that value, and a negative d
indicates that women score higher than men. Many researchers use Cohen’s
(1988) suggestions for interpreting the magnitude of the effect (i.e., small
d = .20, medium d = .50, large d = .80). In sum, the results of these national
surveys (Konrad, Ritchie, Lieb, & Corrigall, 2000; Rowe & Snizek, 1995)
and meta-analyses (Konrad et al., 2000) have found mostly small gender
differences in values except for communal values. Women report stronger
values for helping others and working with people than do men, with effect
sizes in the medium range for these values (d = −.36 to −.45).
Race and Ethnic Differences
Similar to the gender-difference literature on work values, much of the early
research, although in this case drawn from national samples, was based
on small numbers of ethnic/minority participants. Most of the research

434

Career Development and Counseling

has explored value differences between Whites and African Americans
(Brenner, Blanzini, & Greenhaus, 1988; Kasheﬁ, 2011; Martin & Tuch, 1993;
Ransford & Miller, 1983; Shapiro, 1977). In general, this body of research
suggests that African Americans report stronger values for extrinsic rewards
(e.g., income and job security) and lesser values for such intrinsic rewards
such as job accomplishments than do Whites, although these differences
reduce considerably (but not completely) when social class (i.e., education,
occupation, and income) and family background variables are controlled
(Martin & Tuch, 1993; Shapiro, 1977). Similar patterns of differences were
found in more recent studies. For example, Kasheﬁ (2011) found that Whites
preferred intrinsic rewards (d = .29), and African Americans preferred
extrinsic (d = .31) rewards, although, as in earlier results, these differences
disappeared among Whites and African Americans holding professional
and managerial occupations. African Americans also preferred relational
(d = .11) and enhancement (d = .29) rewards (e.g., status and prestige) more
than did Whites in this study. Finally, some studies (e.g., Ransford & Miller,
1983) have found that gender differences in values may be more profound
for Whites (d = .66) than for African Americans (d = .11).
Studies of Asians, American Indians, or Hispanics are few, and explanations of those racial differences typically take an Individual-Collectivism
perspective (Triandis, McCusker, & Hui, 1990). Individualist cultures emphasize personal needs and goals, thus promoting values such as autonomy,
independence, and personal growth. Collectivistic cultures, on the contrary,
place the needs and goals of the group over those of the individual, promoting communal values such as relationship with others and conformity with
norms and traditions. Despite this theoretical connection, empirical results in
regard to individualism and collectivism and work values of different racial
and ethnic groups are mixed and unclear (e.g., Hartung, Fouad, Leong, &
Hardin, 2010; Robinson & Betz, 2008). These mixed ﬁndings may be due
to the small samples of convenience or the need to develop more elaborate
models to explain the relations of individualism and collectivism and work
values (e.g., Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002). Future studies are
encouraged to collect more representative and larger samples.
APPLICATION OF VALUES MEASURES IN CAREER COUNSELING
Theory of Work Adjustment: Minnesota Importance Questionnaire
We begin the discussion of work value measures with the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire (MIQ; Gay, Weiss, Hendel, Dawis, & Lofquist, 1971;
Rounds et al., 1981) because the MIQ lays the foundation for the recent
development of the O*NET values measures. Most of the research and the
counseling applications that come from the MIQ are applicable to the O*NET

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

435

value measures as well. The MIQ is a rationally derived measure of 20 vocational needs organized under six work-related values based on the theory of
work adjustment (Dawis & Lofquist, 1984; Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2,
this volume). This measure was developed as part of the work adjustment
project at the University of Minnesota. The MIQ reﬂects a P-E ﬁt approach to
career counseling (Rounds & Tracey, 1990), which assumes that individuals
will seek a work environment that matches their behavioral dispositions,
including both needs and abilities.
Vocational needs are viewed as a subset of a larger set of personality
needs and are especially important for understanding how individuals can
identify career choices that will lead to satisfaction through reinforcement.
Work-related reinforcers are rewards that are associated with the performance of work-related behaviors, and vocational needs are preferences for
different reinforcers. The purpose of the MIQ is to help individuals identify the relative importance of each reinforcer and link these preferences
to different occupational choices. In a counseling setting, the MIQ can be
used to help identify the needs that are most important to the individual
and then identify work environments that offer corresponding reinforcers.
Comparisons between an individual’s needs and the reinforcer patterns of
different occupations provide a systematic way to explore the world of work
and identify career choices that are most likely to be satisfying.
There are two forms available for the MIQ. One is a 210-item pairedcomparison form that includes 190 forced-choice items where respondents
are asked to choose between two need statements, and 20 absolute scale
rating items, where respondents are asked to indicate the importance of
each of the needs. The second form is a multiple rank-order measure
where the forced-choice items are replaced by a series of items asking
respondents to rank the relative importance of sets of ﬁve needs. Both
versions are pencil-and-paper measures that need to be sent to the publisher
for scoring. As noted in its manual (Rounds et al., 1981), the MIQ has
excellent psychometric characteristics, including good internal consistency
and test–retest reliability, which suggests that the MIQ is a reliable measure
that assesses individual characteristics that tend to remain stable over time.
Data collected as part of the University of Minnesota Work Adjustment
Project also demonstrate that MIQ scores are predictive of job satisfaction
(see Dawis & Lofquist, 1984).
The MIQ and career counseling. Strategies for using MIQ results in counseling
are outlined in the MIQ manual (Rounds et al., 1981). The ﬁrst step in
interpretation is to examine the logically consistent triad (LCT) score, an
index of the nonrandomness of the client’s response pattern. A number

436

Career Development and Counseling

of factors can contribute to random responding, in which case results
may reﬂect the individual’s inability to choose among different options
or may reﬂect some problem in the assessment process, including poor
understanding of the task, low motivation, carelessness, a response set, an
attempt to fake results, or too low a reading ability. In cases where the
LCT score indicates a valid proﬁle, there are a number of interpretation
strategies recommended. One method of interpretation is to use the scores
on each scale to create an individual’s hierarchy of needs and then use
this hierarchy as a starting point for exploring career-related options. MIQ
scores can also be interpreted with reference to the norms that have been
developed for the measure, and scores can be used to predict satisfaction in
different occupations, both at the individual occupation level (Stewart et al.,
1986) and based on clusters of occupations from the Minnesota Occupational
Classiﬁcation System (MOCS III; Dawis et al., 1987). Additional strategies
include having the client interpret the meaning of each need statement or
having the client do a self-estimation of needs.
The MIQ has many characteristics that make it useful for career counseling.
Its development is rooted in an empirically supported psychological theory
of career development. The MIQ has a hierarchical structure of needs and
values that allows for a discussion of results at different levels of speciﬁcity
to reﬂect the varying developmental levels of career counseling clients. More
speciﬁcally, clients who are in the early stages of career development may
beneﬁt more from a general discussion of values, whereas clients who are
further along in the process of making career-related decisions may beneﬁt
from a more detailed discussion of speciﬁc needs. The needs and values
measured by the MIQ can be linked to occupational outcomes, although the
MIQ offers information on only a limited number of occupations that are not
grouped by level of educational requirements. It should be noted that the
MIQ, the research data that supported its development, and the information it
provides in counseling are becoming progressively more dated. Fortunately,
both of these concerns have been addressed by the development of the
MIQ-based O*NET value measures.
O*NET Value Measures
Two values measures, developed as part of the O*NET (see Gore et al.,
Chapter 18, this volume), update and expand the information available
from the MIQ. Linking results to the O*NET increases the number of
occupations that can be matched to an individual’s needs and values and
allows for the organization of occupations based on job zones, a series of
hierarchical categories based on the required level of education and training.
The Work Importance Proﬁler (WIP; U.S. Department of Labor, 2000b)

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

437

is a computerized assessment program that uses the multiple-rank order
format from the MIQ. On completion of the WIP, a report can be generated
that includes a list of occupations from the O*NET database that match
the individual’s proﬁle, sorted into categories reﬂecting different levels of
educational requirements. Interpretation of WIP results and their application
in career counseling is otherwise the same as for the MIQ.
The Work Importance Locator (WIL; U.S. Department of Labor, 2000a) is
a self-scoring measure that uses a card-sorting task to determine the relative
importance of the MIQ needs. Value scores are calculated by hand using a
workbook that also lists a number of occupations that are associated with
each value by job zone. Details of the development of these measures are
presented in technical reports by McCloy and colleagues (1999a, 1999b).
Overall, the reliability for the computerized WIP is comparable to the
reliability for the MIQ, but the reliability for the WIL is less impressive,
perhaps reﬂecting the limitations of using a card-sorting technique.
O*NET value measures and career counseling. A critical issue with the use of
assessment instruments in the career counseling process is being able to
link results to occupational choices. In general, the use of a values measure
can lead to insights about what is important to the client, serving as a catalyst for personal growth. However, a values measure that can be linked to
occupations offers the critical advantage of a second level of discourse—an
examination of how values are related to satisfaction. It is this advantage that
separates the MIQ and its O*NET offspring from the other value taxonomies
and measures discussed in this chapter. The data used to connect O*NET
value proﬁles to occupations are more extensive and up-to-date than what
is available for the MIQ (Rounds, Armstrong, Liao, Lewis, & Rivkin, 2008).
These data and the measures themselves can be downloaded free at the U.S.
Department of Labor’s O*NET website, http://www.onetcenter.org. The
O*NET presents an impressive and unprecedented opportunity to combine
different types of information on occupations to create a cohesive picture
of how individuals can be matched to work environments. A battery of
assessment instruments has been developed for the O*NET, including an
ability measure, computerized and pencil-and-paper Holland-based interest
measures, and the MIQ-based value measures. Results can be linked to information on the more than 800 occupations in the O*NET database, including
generalized work activities, work and organizational contexts, skill and
ability requirements, knowledge areas and requirements for occupational
preparation, and occupational interests and values.
Of the two O*NET-based values measures, the computerized WIP offers
more sophisticated methods for matching results to occupational information

438

Career Development and Counseling

and can be used to generate a detailed report for review by the counselor
and client. The self-scoring WIL version is useful in cases where there is
limited access to computers or for group administrations. The WIL can
also be used within a counseling session where the client can talk through
the meaning of the need statements, for example, while sorting the need
statements according to their importance.
Measures Based on Super’s Theory: Values Scale
and Work Values Inventory–Revised
Super (1957) initially developed the Work Values Inventory for his Career
Pattern Study. Over the past 50 years, Super’s prototype value measure
has been revised many times and has been in and out of print. Currently,
the best versions of Super’s measures are the Values Scale (Nevill & Super,
1986) and Super’s Work Values Inventory–Revised (Zytowski, 2006). The
Values Scale is based on Super’s (1980) career development theory and
was initially developed in several languages for the cross-cultural study of
the career development process, the results of which are detailed in Super
and Sverko (1995). Nevill and Kruse (1996) have reviewed the empirical
support for the Values Scale and discussed its use in career assessment
and counseling. Super’s Work Values Inventory–Revised is a commercially
available measure within the Kuder Career Planning System.
The Values Scale is a 105-item instrument measuring the importance of 21
values, using 21 ﬁve-item scales with a 4-point response format. Nevill and
Super (1986) suggest that this assessment method allows for both ipsative
and normative interpretations of the results of the Values Scale. By ranking
values according to the relative scores obtained on each scale, it is possible
to create a values hierarchy for an individual. However, given the social
desirability of many values (see Rokeach, 1973), most instrument designers
have opted for a forced-choice format to create a values hierarchy. With the
rating method used in the Values Scale, it is possible for a client who is having
difﬁculty making career-related decisions to indicate that all of the values
are ‘‘very important’’ to him or her, making the results meaningless. In other
cases, variability in the range of responses may reﬂect only measurement
error instead of substantive differences in the importance of each value. Apart
from the values hierarchy, it is possible to provide a normative interpretation
of the results, which would compare an individual’s scores to a set of norms
obtained from a representative sample of the population to which the
individual belongs. Unfortunately, such an application is not yet possible.
Although the Values Scale was used in the multinational WIS, the data from
that project have yet to be presented in a form that would permit this type
of normative interpretation. The Values Scale is currently out of print.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

439

Zytowski (2006) has developed a commercially available form of Super’s
work values, called Super’s Work Value Inventory–Revised (SWVI-R). The
SWVI-R is a revision of Super’s 1970 Work Values Inventory. The SWVI-R
consists of 12 scales of 6 items each, for a total of 72 items. The scales consist
of the following work values: Achievement, Coworkers, Creativity, Income,
Independence, Lifestyle, Mental Challenge, Prestige, Security, Supervision,
Work Environment, and Variety. Clients respond to the items using a 5point response format reﬂecting the degree of importance of each value.
Zytowski (2006) recommended creating a values hierarchy for clients based
on a ranking of their values on each scale. Because of the possibility that
clients will rate all values as important, normative interpretations are not
recommended. To link the SWVI-R values with occupations, Zytowski (2006)
matched the 12 SWVI-R work values with the 20 O*NET work values. From
this matching, a list of O*NET occupations are generated. Because of value
mismatches (e.g., WIP Activity with SWVI-R Independence), we recommend
that counselors not use this section of the SWVI-R report.
Initial research shows that, with the exception of the Independence scale,
the SWVI-R scales are reliable (Robinson & Betz, 2008). Structural studies
have yet to converge on a common framework for the SWVI-R scales (cf.,
Robinson & Betz, 2008; Zytowski, 2006). Norms have been developed but
the representativeness of the norm sample is unclear from the technical
manual (Zytowski, 2006). Although these issues are a drawback to practical
use, a major concern similar to the development of the Value Scale is that
the coverage of values is limited when compared to other inventories.
Research is needed to expand the coverage of the SWVI-R work-value
domain.
Use of work value inventories in career counseling. Many of the articles and
manuals on the use of work values in counseling focus on speciﬁc inventories.
But most of the advice and recommendations in these articles and manuals
are applicable to any assessment of work values. The application of the
Values Scale in career counseling has been linked to Super’s (1983) career
development assessment and counseling (C-DAC) model by Nevill and
Kruse (1996) (see Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume). In this model, there
are three important issues to address: The ﬁrst issue is to determine values
the client would like to realize through work; the second, to assess the
relative importance of work to the client relative to other life roles; and the
third, to assess the client’s readiness to make career-related decisions.
According to Nevill and Kruse (1996), the Values Scale addresses the
ﬁrst issue by assessing the values of the individual and identifying those
that will be important to him or her in the work domain. Understanding

440

Career Development and Counseling

the importance of the work role relative to other life roles has important
implications for the career counseling process because clients who do not
see work as important may not be in the best position to work with the
results of career-related assessment measures. Nevill and Kruse recommend
discussing with the client the relative importance of different life roles. For
clients who do not view the work role as important, Nevill and Kruse recommend using interventions designed to increase awareness of the importance
of work, as these clients may not be ready to engage in a detailed analysis
of assessment results. In comparison, clients who view the worker role as
important would not need this type of intervention before attempting to
make critical educational and career-related decisions.
The primary limitation of using the Values Scale in career counseling is
the limited data available linking results to career-related outcomes. The
comparisons are the MIQ and WIP, the results of which can be linked to
meaningful vocational outcomes based on empirical data. For example, if a
person scores high on the MIQ or WIP measures of Achievement or Ability
Utilization, a database of occupational information can be used to identify
potential career choices where these values will be reinforced. In comparison,
if a person scores high on the Values Scale measures of Achievement
or Ability Utilization, there is no equivalent database of information for
interpreting results. Furthermore, the Values Scale assesses a limited range
of work values, lacking the organizational values measured by the MIQ
and WIP.
Other Value Measures
In addition to the MIQ, its O*NET-based variations, and Super’s Values
Scale and Zytowski’s revised Work Values Inventory, there are a number
of values measures available, varying in psychometric robustness, that
correspond to the various taxonomies and models previously discussed in
this chapter. Included in this category are Rokeach’s (1973) classic values
measure; Kopelman, Rovenpor, and Guan’s (2003) update of the AllportVernon-Lindzey Study of Values; the circumplex measure of values proposed
by Schwartz (1992; see Struch, Schwartz, & van der Kloot, 2002); the values
measure used by Hofstede (1980, 2001) in his cross-cultural research; and
any number of idiosyncratic value measures developed by researchers in
the industrial-organizational area, a review of which is beyond the scope
of this chapter. The use of these measures in career counseling could lead
to interesting discussions and an increased understanding of the relative
importance of different values to a client, but the inability to reliably link
these results to occupational outcomes limits the range of their clinical
application.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

441

CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Values represent an important source of information that can be used to
facilitate the career development process. Work values are embedded in
Dawis and Lofquist’s theory of work adjustment and Super’s discussions of
career development. A critical reason to assess work values in career counseling is that value correspondence (ﬁt between person values and work
outcomes) is related to occupation and job choice and to satisfaction with
work environments. Furthermore, when individuals enter the work force,
value congruence is related to job performance, organizational commitment, and turnover. A possible reason for why value congruence is related
to satisfaction and performance is that shared values between employees and organizations promote the development of trust, mutual liking,
friendship, enhanced communication, and information exchange within the
work setting.
Intrinsic values increase after high school (18–22 years), when many young
adults leave their families and engage in further training or schooling. During early adulthood (age 22 and beyond), adults place more importance
on extrinsic and status values. These ﬁndings indicate that counselors need
to assist high school and college students in understanding possible value
changes across early adulthood when exploring careers. There are small gender, ethnic, and racial differences in work values, with the most prominent
difference being gender differences in work values that involve communion.
Women value communion, the tendency to work with or help people, more
than do men.
The use of a values measure in career counseling should be part of
an integrative strategy combining different sources of information and
perspectives to help individuals make informed career-related decisions.
Among the measures that represent the different value taxonomies and
models presented in this chapter, the O*NET-based WIP and WIL offer the
best strategy for linking values to occupations. The other values measures
we reviewed cannot link results to the range of career-related information
available in the O*NET. As the U.S. Department of Labor continues to
develop and update the O*NET database, the discrepancy between the
range of information available through the WIP and other measures will
continue to grow. In short, other value measures may be a starting point for
a discussion of what is important to a client but cannot provide an answer to
the potentially more interesting question of how to link these values to work.
REFERENCES
Alderfer, C. P. (1969). An empirical test of a new theory of human needs. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 4, 142–175.

442

Career Development and Counseling

Allport, G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in personality. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Allport, G. W., & Vernon, P. E. (1931). A study of values. Cambridge, MA: HoughtonMifﬂin.
Allport, G. W., Vernon, P. E., & Lindzey, G. (1970). Study of values (rev. 3rd ed.).
Chicago, IL: Riverside.
Armstrong, P. I., Day, S. X, McVay, J. P., & Rounds, J. (2008). Holland’s RIASEC
model as an integrative framework for individual differences. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 55, 1–18.
Arthur, W., Bell, S. T., Villado, A. J., & Doverspike, D. (2006). The use of
person–organization ﬁt in employment decision making: An assessment of its
criterion-related validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 786–801.
Ballout, H. I. (2007). Career success: The effects of human capital, person–
environment ﬁt and organizational support. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 22,
745–761.
Bardi, A., & Schwartz, S. H. (2003). Values and behavior: Strength and structure of
relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1207–1220.
Brenner, O. C., Blazini, A. P., & Greenhaus, J. H. (1988). An examination of race
and sex differences in managerial work values. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 32,
336–344.
Bretz, R. D., Jr., & Judge, T. A. (1994). Person–organization ﬁt and the theory of
work adjustment: Implications for satisfaction, tenure, and career success. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 44, 32–54.
Brown, D. (1996). Brown’s value-based, holistic model of career and life-role choices
and satisfaction. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career choices and
development (3rd ed., pp. 337–372). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brown, D., & Crace, R. K. (1996). Values in life role choices and outcomes: A
conceptual model. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 211–224.
Buehler, C. (1933). Der menschilch lebenslauf als psychologisches problem (The human
life course as a psychological subject). Leipzig, Germany: Hirzel.
Cable, D. M., & DeRue, D. S. (2002). The convergent and discriminant validity of
subjective ﬁt perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 875–884.
Campbell, J. P., & Pritchard, R. D. (1976). Motivation theory in industrial and
organizational psychology. In M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and
organizational psychology (pp. 63–130). Chicago, IL: Rand Mc Nally.
Caspi, A., & Roberts, B. W. (1999). Personality change and continuity across the
life course. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality theory and
research (pp. 300–326). New York, NY: Guilford.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (2006). Age changes in personality and their origins:
Comment on Roberts, Walton, and Viechtbauer (2006). Psychological Bulletin, 132,
26–28.
Dawis, R. V. (1991). Vocational interests, values, and preferences. In M. D. Dunnette
& L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed.,
vol. 2, pp. 833–871). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

443

Dawis, R. V. (2001). Toward a psychology of values. Counseling Psychologist, 29,
458–465.
Dawis, R. V., Dohm, T. E., Lofquist, L. H., Chartrand, J. M., & Due, A. M. (1987). Minnesota Occupational Classiﬁcation System III. Minneapolis: Vocational Psychology
Research, Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota.
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
De Fruyt, F., Bartels, M., Van Leeuwen, K. G., De Clercq, B., Decuyper, M., &
Mervielde, I. (2006). Five types of personality continuity in childhood and adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 538–552.
Edwards, J. R., & Cable, D. M. (2009). The value of value congruence. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 94, 654–677.
Elizur, D., & Sagie, A. (1999). Facets of personal values: A structural analysis of life
and work values. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 17, 501–514.
Ferreira-Marques, J., & Miranda, M. J. (1995). Developing the work importance
study. In D. E. Super & B. Sverko (Eds.), Life roles, values, and careers: International
ﬁndings of the work importance study (pp. 62–74). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Fischer, R., Vauclair, C., Fontaine, J. R. J., & Schwartz, S. H. (2010). Are individuallevel and country-level value structures different? Testing Hofstede’s legacy with
the Schwartz Value Survey. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 41, 135–151.
Gay, E. G., Weiss, D. J., Hendel, D. D., Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1971). Manual
for the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire. Minnesota Studies in Vocational
Rehabilitation, 28, 1–83. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, Industrial Relations
Center.
Ginzberg, E., Ginsburg, S. W., Axelrad, S., & Herma, J. (1951). Occupational choice:
An approach to a general theory. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Hartung, P. J., Fouad, N. A., Leong, F. T. L., & Hardin, E. E. (2010). Individualismcollectivism: Links to occupational plans and work values. Journal of Career
Assessment, 18, 34–45.
Helson, R., & Moane, G. (1987). Personality change in women from college to midlife.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 176–186.
Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., & Snyderman, B. (1959). The motivation to work (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related
values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Cultural consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions and
organizations across nations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Jin, J., & Rounds, J. (2012). Stability and change in work values: A meta-analysis of
longitudinal studies. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 80, 326–339.
Judge, T. A., & Bretz, R. D. (1992). Effects of work values on job choice decisions.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 261–271.
Kanfer, R. (1991). Motivation theory and industrial and organizational psychology.
In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology (vol. 1, pp. 75–170). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

444

Career Development and Counseling

Kanfer, R., Chen, G., & Pritchard, R. D. (2008). The three C’s of work motivation:
Content, context, and change. In R. Kanfer, G. Chen, & R. D. Pritchard (Eds.), Work
motivation: Past, present, and future (pp. 1–16). New York, NY: Routledge.
Kasheﬁ, M. (2011). Structure and/or culture: Explaining racial differences in work
values. Journal of Black Studies, 42, 638–664.
Konrad, A. M., Ritchie, J. E., Lieb, P., & Corrigall, E. (2000). Sex differences and
similarities in job attributes preferences: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
126, 593–641.
Kopelman, R. E., Rovenpor, J. L., & Guan, M. (2003). The study of values: Construction of the fourth edition. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 203–220.
Kristof, A. (1996). Person–organization ﬁt: An integrative review of its conceptualizations, measurement, and implications. Personnel Psychology, 49, 1–48.
Kristof-Brown, A. L., & Guay, R. P. (2010). Person–environment ﬁt. In S. Zedeck
(Ed.), APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (vol. 3, pp.3–50).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences
of individual’s ﬁt at work: A meta-analysis of person-job, person-organization,
person-group, and person-supervisor ﬁt. Personnel Psychology, 58, 281–342.
Lindsay, P., & Knox, W. E. (1984). Continuity and change in work values
among young adults: A longitudinal study. American Journal of Sociology, 89,
918–931.
Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In M. D. Dunnette
(Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1297–1349). Chicago,
IL: Rand McNally.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1978). Values as second-order needs in the theory of
work adjustment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13, 12–19.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1991). Essentials of person environment correspondence
counseling. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lyons, S., Higgins, C. A., & Duxbury, L. (2010). Work values: Development of a
new three-dimensional structure based on conﬁrmatory smallest space analysis.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 31, 969–1002.
Macnab, D., & Fitzsimmons, G. W. (1987). A multitrait–multimethod study of
work-related needs, values and preferences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 30,
1–15.
Martin, J. K., & Tuch, S. A. (1993). Black-White differences in the value of job rewards
revisited. Social Science Quarterly, 74, 884–901.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1959). New knowledge in human values. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
McCloy, R. A., Waugh, G., Medsker, G., Wall, J., Rivkin, D., & Lewis, P. (1999a). Determining the Occupational Reinforcer Patterns for O*NET occupational units (2 vols.).
Raleigh, NC: National Center for O*NET Development.
McCloy, R., Waugh, G., Medsker, G., Wall, J., Rivkin, D., & Lewis P. (1999b).
Development of the Computerized Work Importance Proﬁler. Raleigh, NC: National
Center for O*NET Development.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

445

McCloy, R., Waugh, G., Medsker, G., Wall, J., Rivkin, D., & Lewis P. (1999c).
Development of the Paper-and-Pencil Work Importance Locator. Raleigh, NC: National
Center for O*NET Development.
Mortimer, J. T., & Lorence, J. (1979). Work experience and occupational value
socialization: A longitudinal study. American Journal of Sociology, 84, 1361–1385.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Nevill, D. D., & Kruse, S. J. (1996). Career assessment and the values scale. Journal of
Career Assessment, 4, 383–397.
Nevill, D. D., & Super, D. E. (1986). The Value Scale: Theory, application, and research.
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Nord, W. R., Brief, A. P., Atieh, J. M., & Doherty, E. M. (1990). Studying meaning
of work: The case of work values. In A. P. Brief & W. R. Nord (Eds.), Meanings of
occupational work (pp. 21–64). Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Ostroff, C., & Judge, T. A. (Eds.). (2007). Perspectives on organizational ﬁt. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism and collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 128, 3–72.
Perrewe, P. L., & Hochwarter, W. A. (2001). Can we really have it all? The attainment
of work and family values. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10, 29–33.
Peterson, N. G., Mumford, M. D., Borman, W. C., Jeanneret, E. A., & Fleishman, P. R.
(1999). An occupational information system for the 21st century: The development of the
O*NET. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ransford, H. E., & Miller, J. (1983). Race, sex, and feminist outlooks. American
Sociological Review, 48, 46–59.
Robinson, C. H., & Betz, N. E. (2008). A psychometric evaluation of Super’s Work
Values Inventory–Revised. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 456–473.
Roe, R. A., & Ester, P. (1999). Values and work: Empirical ﬁndings and theoretical
perspective. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 48, 1–21.
Rohan, M. J. (2000). A rose by any name? The values construct. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 4, 255–277.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of human values. New York, NY: Free Press.
Ronen, S. (1994). An underlying structure of motivational need taxonomies: A crosscultural conﬁrmation. In H. C. Triandis, M. D. Dunnette, & L. M. Hough (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (vol. 4, pp. 241–270). Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologist Press.
Ros, M., Schwartz, S. H., & Surkiss, S. (1999). Basic individual values, work values,
and the meaning of work. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 48, 49–71.
Rounds, J. B. (1990). The comparative and combined utility of work-value and
interest data in career counseling with adults. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37,
32–45.
Rounds, J., Armstrong, P. I., Liao, H.-Y., Lewis, P., & Rivkin, D. (2008). Second generation occupational value proﬁles for the O*NET system. Raleigh, NC:

446

Career Development and Counseling

National Center for O*NET Development. Retrieved from http://www.onetcenter
.org/reports/SecondOVP_Summary.html
Rounds, J. B., Henly, G. A., Dawis, R. V., Lofquist, L. H., & Weiss, D. J. (1981).
Manual for the Minnesota Importance Questionnaire: A measure of needs and values.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Department of Psychology.
Rounds, J. B., & Tracey, T. J. (1990). From trait-and-factor to person–environment
ﬁt counseling: Theory and process. In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Career
counseling (pp. 1–44). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rowe, R., & Snizek, W. E. (1995). Gender differences in work values: Perpetuating
the myth. Work and Occupations, 22, 215–229.
Schaffer, R. H. (1953). Job satisfaction as related to need satisfaction in work.
Psychological Monographs, 67, (Whole Serial Number 364).
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values: Theoretical
advances and empirical tests in 20 countries. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (vol. 24, pp. 1–65). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Schwartz, S. (1994). Are there universal aspects in the structure and contents of
human values? Journal of Social Issues, 50, 19–45.
Schwartz, S. (1996). Value priorities and behavior: Applying a theory of integrated
value systems. In C. Seligman, J. M. Olson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Values: The
Ontario symposium (vol. 8, pp. 1–24). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schwartz, S. H. (1999). A theory of cultural values and some implications for work.
Applied Psychology: An International Review, 48, 23–47.
Shapiro, E. G. (1977). Racial differences in the value of job rewards. Social Forces, 56,
21–30.
Sheldon, K. M. (2005). Positive value change during college: Normative trends and
individual differences. Journal of Research in Personality, 39, 209–223.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms. New York, NY: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Spranger, E. (1928). Types of men: The psychology and ethics of personality (Paul J. W.
Pigors, Trans.). Halle, Germany: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
Stewart, E. S., Greenstein, S. M., Holt, N. C., Henly, G. A., Engdahl, B. E., Dawis, R.
V., . . . Weiss, D. J. (1986). Occupational reinforcer patterns. Minneapolis: Vocational
Psychology Research, University of Minnesota Department of Psychology.
Struch, N., Schwartz, S. H., & van der Kloot, W. A. (2002). Meanings of basic values
for women and men: A cross-cultural analysis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 28, 16–28.
Super, D. E. (1957). The psychology of careers. New York, NY: Harper and Bros.
Super, D. E. (1962). The structure of work values in relation to status, achievement,
interest, and adjustment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 46, 227–239.
Super, D. E. (1970). Work Values Inventory. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span, life-space approach to career development. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 16, 282–298.
Super, D. E. (1983). Assessment in career guidance: Toward truly developmental
counseling. Personnel and Guidance Journal, 61, 555–562.

Nature, Importance, and Assessment of Needs and Values

447

Super, D. E. (1995). Values: Their nature, assessment, and practical use. In D. E. Super
& B. Sverko (Eds.), Life roles, values, and careers: International ﬁndings of the work
importance study (pp. 54–61). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Super, D. E., & Sverko, B. (Eds.). (1995). Life roles, values, and careers: International
ﬁndings of the work importance study. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Sverko, B. (1995). The structure and hierarchy of values viewed cross-nationally. In
D. E. Super & B. Sverko (Eds.), Life roles, values, and careers: International ﬁndings of
the work importance study (pp. 225–240). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Triandis, H. C., McCusker, C., & Hui, C. H. (1990). Multimethod probes of individualism and collectivism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1006–1020.
Twenge, J. M., Campbell, S. M., Hoffman, B. J., & Lance, C. E. (2010). Generational
differences in work values: Leisure and extrinsic values increasing, social and
intrinsic values decreasing. Journal of Management, 36, 1117–1142.
U.S. Department of Labor. (2000a). Work Importance Locator: User’s guide. Washington,
DC: Employment and Training Administration.
U.S. Department of Labor. (2000b). Work Importance Proﬁler: User’s guide. Washington,
DC: Employment and Training Administration.
Verquer, M. L., Beehr, T. A., & Wagner, S. H. (2003). A meta-analysis of relations
between person–organization ﬁt and work attitudes. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
63, 473–489.
Williams, J. E., & Best, D. L. (1990). Measuring sex stereotypes: A multination study.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Young, A. M., & Hurlic, D. (2007). Gender enactment at work: The importance
of gender and gender-related behavior to person-organizational ﬁt and career
decisions. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 22, 168–187.
Zytowski, D. (2006). Super Work Values Inventory–Revised: Technical manual (Version
1.0). Retrieved from http://www.kuder.com/solutions/kuder-assessments.aspx
#supers_work_values_inventory

C H A P T E R 16

Ability and Aptitude Assessment
in Career Counseling
A. J. METZ AND JANICE E. JONES

T

HIS CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS THE use of abilities, aptitudes, and skills in expand-

ing career options, narrowing options, making a career decision, and
managing one’s career. First, we examine some of the historical
milestones associated with ability assessment. Then we deﬁne important
constructs and review the structure and stability of these constructs, with
special attention to gender and cultural differences. Assessment strategies,
methods, and tools are also explored, with the primary goal of promoting
effective, scientiﬁcally informed career practices in high school, college, and
the workforce.
HISTORICAL MILESTONES IN ABILITY ASSESSMENT
The measurement of human capacity has a long tradition dating back to at
least the fourth century bc, when Greek physicians and philosophers like
Hippocrates and Plato began to make connections between the brain and
cognitive functioning, suggesting that the brain contributed to motivation,
feelings, sensations, wisdom, and knowledge and was the site of all knowledge (Crivellato & Ribatti, 2007). The ﬁrst written account demonstrating
the use of ability assessment, in fact, appeared as long ago as during the
Han Dynasty in China (206 bc to 220 ad), when competitive exams were
used for civil service selection, allowing persons, regardless of background
and wealth, to attain high-ranking positions in the government (Miyazaki,
1981). The ﬁrst theory of intelligence appeared in the 16th-century writings
of Spanish philosopher Juan Huarte de San Juan and described individual
variations in memory, learning, and imagination (Hunt, 2005). Despite the
449

450

Career Development and Counseling

long history of interest in the assessment of human capacity, the modern
history of the study of individual differences in human traits is attributed
to the work of Sir Francis Galton (Jensen, 2002). Galton initially studied
the heredity of human ability by examining the pedigrees of high-achieving
individuals. He later studied monozygotic twins and from this research
concluded that general mental ability, or what he referred to as intelligence,
is inherited in much the same way as many physical traits (Jensen, 2002).
Galton believed that the speed of information processing was the basis for
general ability and therefore measured intelligence using reaction time to
simple tests of visual and auditory stimuli (Acton & Schroeder, 2001).
Galton conceived general ability as the sum of an individual’s scores on
various tests of mental ability. Charles Spearman reﬁned Galton’s ideas
and introduced a two-factor theory of intelligence that comprised a general
factor (g)—which instead of being the sum of scores on various tests, is
distilled from the correlations between them—and a speciﬁc factor (s), which
reﬂects a factor that is speciﬁc to a particular test. Thus, for example, the
score that a student receives on a vocabulary test is inﬂuenced by his or
her general learning ability (g) and factors speciﬁc to performing well on
a vocabulary test (e.g., size of parents’ vocabulary, number of books in the
home). To determine the degree to which a test measured g (the common
factor) within the context of other tests, Spearman pioneered a new statistical
method, factor analysis (Jensen, 2002). Since 1904, factor analytic methods
have supported g as a common factor inherent in the psychometric structure
of abilities as measured by a diverse array of cognitive tests.
Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon have been credited with developing the
ﬁrst IQ test. In the early 1900s, the French government passed a law requiring
all children to attend school. They sought help in identifying children who
were likely to need specialized assistance in their education. The Binet-Simon
Scale included questions assessing attention, memory, and problem-solving
skills. Based on his observations about how children answered questions
on the test, Binet proposed a measure of intelligence based on the average
abilities of children of a particular age group. He called this concept ‘‘mental
age.’’ An American psychologist at Stanford University, Lewis Terman,
adapted Binet’s original test for use in the United States. This test was
published in 1916 and called the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. Terman
proposed that an IQ could be calculated by dividing the individual’s mental
age by his or her chronological age and multiplying by 100. Although IQ
scores are calculated differently today, an IQ of 100 still represents an average
level of intelligence. The military developed two additional intelligence tests
during World War I—the Army Alpha (verbal tests for literate recruits)
and the Army Beta (nonverbal) tests of intelligence. Understanding and
measuring intelligence became a major focus of research after World War I.

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

451

Another avenue of research on ability assessment during the post–World
War I era is illustrated by research conducted at the University of Minnesota
that sought to analyze the types of abilities required in different jobs and
develop tests of these job-speciﬁc abilities. For example, their efforts resulted
in the publication of the Minnesota Mechanical Ability Tests (MMAT;
Anderson, Elliott, Paterson, Toops, & Heidbreder, 1930). Tests of abilities such as the MMAT attempted to match an individual with a job based on
speciﬁc job-related abilities instead of intelligence. Thus, instead of focusing
only on overall differences in g, abilities were conceptualized more specifically to include multiple individual-difference factors that were thought
to inﬂuence learning and performance in different jobs. That is, different
jobs require different abilities, and the assessment of job-speciﬁc abilities
provides a more effective way to select employees than by simply assessing
g. This view (that the assessment of work-speciﬁc abilities enables better job matching than intelligence) led to the development of a variety of
multiaptitude test batteries and underlies most ability assessment in career
counseling today.
Three major multiaptitude test batteries developed in the post–World
War I period are still used today. The United States Armed Forces revised
the Army Alpha and Beta intelligence tests to create the Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Test Battery (ASVAB) used for selection and assignment
purposes. The U.S. Department of Labor designed the General Aptitude Test
Battery (GATB) to predict job performance and later revised the GATB to
provide a multiaptitude test battery to be used in conjunction with the
O*NET (see Gore, Leuwerke, & Kelly, Chapter 18, this volume). This test
battery (called the Ability Proﬁler) is discussed along with the ASVAB later
in this chapter.
DEFINING ABILITIES, SKILLS, AND APTITUDES
Abilities, aptitudes, and skills are separate but highly related constructs.
Ability is the physical or mental capacity (learned or innate) to complete a
speciﬁc act or task (Snow, 1994). Ability assessments consist of a series of
timed tasks or work samples and measure the relative ease with which an
individual can perform the task. Results indicate strengths and weaknesses
in speciﬁc abilities or what the person can do now and will be potentially
able to do in the future (Betz, Fitzgerald, & Hill, 1989). Thus, for example, a
person with strong mechanical abilities has already acquired a high level of
proﬁciency with mechanical activities (compared to his or her peers) and has
the potential to acquire even more proﬁciency with appropriate experience.
Skills represent proﬁciency, competence, or dexterity that has been
acquired through practice and repeated use. Skills can be domain-general

452

Career Development and Counseling

(e.g., interpersonal communication, leadership) or domain-speciﬁc (e.g.,
ability to analyze blueprints). In an employment context, workplace skills
may be assessed through educational credentialing, observation of task performance, or task performance outcome. In a career counseling context, selfestimates of skill may be useful in the consideration of alternate careers,
appraisal of occupational requirements, self-promotion (e.g., resume development, employment interviews), training needs, and educational planning.
Skills are similar to abilities in that they provide self-knowledge and
can be used to assess ﬁt between a potential employee and the speciﬁc
requirements of a job. The Minnesota theory of work adjustment (TWA;
see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume) describes how abilities
and skills differ. According to TWA, abilities are broader than skills and
represent ‘‘reference dimensions’’ for skills (i.e., contain a group of skills).
For example, math abilities are composed of a number of skills, including
arithmetic computation and reasoning skills. Most measures of abilities
that we focus on in this chapter use a number of skills tests to measure
a smaller set of abilities. One example, the Ability Proﬁler available via
O*NET uses 11 skills tests to measure nine higher-order work-related
abilities. Because skills are dependent on learning or training, they are
thought to be more easily manipulated than abilities (Fleishman, Costanza, &
Marshall-Mies, 1999).
Snow (1996) deﬁnes aptitude as ‘‘learning to learn, learning to reason,
learning to ﬁnd and solve problems, learning to be interested and industrious,
to persevere, to achieve in the face of novelty, complexity, adversity, and
change’’ (p. 537). He further suggests that ‘‘the term aptitude is intended
to signify preparedness—an aspect of the present state of a person that
is propaedeutic; that is, needed as preparation for future achievement in
some particular situation’’ (p. 537). In a career counseling context, aptitude
can be viewed as the ‘‘likelihood of learning or acquiring the skills required by
the occupation’’ (p. 457; Dawis, Goldman, & Sung, 1992). Most measures used
in counseling are both ability and aptitude tests in that they provide scores
to estimate a person’s current level of performance and potential (ability)
as well as potential for future success in different occupations (aptitude).
Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we use abilities and aptitudes interchangeably
in this chapter because assessment goals in counseling are both diagnostic
(i.e., assess current level of ability and potential) and predictive (i.e., identify
occupations in which a person will be successful in the future).
ISSUES IN UNDERSTANDING AND ASSESSING ABILITIES
The effective use of ability assessment requires knowledge in a number of
important domains. This section begins with an introduction to the organization of modern hierarchical ability models and presents empirical evidence

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

453

for the stability of abilities. Next, gender differences and cultural differences
in cognitive abilities are examined through contemporary empirical sources.
Finally, attention is turned to the role of self-estimates of ability and their
impact on career decision-making and performance.
Structure of Abilities
Numerous theories of intelligence offer insight into the structure of abilities. A comprehensive review of all theories of intelligence is not within
the purview of this chapter. For an overview of major theories of intelligence
(psychometric, cognitive, cognitive-contextual, and biological), readers are
directed to Gardner (2011). The following is a brief review of psychometric and cognitive-contextual theories of intelligence. Psychometric theories
of intelligence are reviewed, as they have received strong empirical support; cognitive-contextual theories are included, given their relevance to
career counseling.
Psychometric theories of intelligence are based on the examination of
individual differences in performance on tests that measure more speciﬁc
cognitive abilities. As noted earlier, Spearman (1927) was the ﬁrst to use
factor analysis to reveal two underlying dimensions of cognitive ability:
g, or general intelligence, and s, representing any number of speciﬁc abilities
related to particular tasks. Thurstone (1938) used Spearman’s factor analytic methods to identify seven primary mental abilities: vocabulary, math
reasoning, spatial ability, memory, reasoning, word ﬂuency, and perceptual
speed. Horn and Cattell (1996) introduced a hierarchical ability model. Their
factor analysis of ability tests yielded 30 to 40 ﬁrst-order factors. These were
then factor analyzed to produce 5 to 9 second-order factors.
Two second-order factors that bear mention are ﬂuid intelligence and
crystallized intelligence. Fluid intelligence is associated with the capacity to
learn and includes tasks such as inductive reasoning, deductive reasoning,
and drawing inferences. Crystallized intelligence is the knowledge gained
from exposure to one’s environment (e.g., school, culture). Fluid and crystallized intelligence are correlated (Brody & Brody, 1976) yet exhibit differential
patterns of growth and decline over time (Gardner, 2011). Horn and Hofner
(1992) suggest that ﬂuid intelligence crests in the early to mid-20s and then
declines, whereas crystallized intelligence does not peak until the early 40s
and may remain stable into late adulthood.
Carroll (1993) conducted an exploratory factor analysis of over 460 cognitive ability data sets and provided the ﬁrst comprehensive, systematic
organization of the structure of human cognitive abilities (McGrew, 2009).
Speciﬁcally, Carroll obtained a three-strata hierarchical structure of cognitive
abilities. At the top of the hierarchy (Stratum III) is g, or general cognitive
ability. Stratum II, the second level of the hierarchy, includes eight broad

454

Career Development and Counseling

ability factors: Fluid Intelligence, Crystallized Intelligence, General Memory
and Learning, Broad Visual Perception, Broad Auditory Perception, Broad
Retrieval Ability, Broad Cognitive Speediness, and Processing Speed. Stratum I, the bottom of the hierarchy, represents 68 very speciﬁc abilities. The
Cattell-Horn and Carroll three-strata models have gone through updates
and revisions but remain standard models for understanding the structure
of human intelligence. Although they differ, the two models have more
recently been integrated into a single theory of intelligence, the CattellHorn-Carroll (CHC) model (McGrew, 2005, 2009). The three models are
graphically depicted in Figure 16.1. As we will see later in this chapter in our
discussion of multiaptitude test batteries, most ability assessment in career
counseling focuses on job-related Stratum II and Stratum III-like abilities.
Cognitive abilities are important in career counseling because they predict
job performance. Citing meta-analytic research, Gottfredson (2003) afﬁrmed
that g, or general intelligence, predicts performance to some degree in all
jobs, and best in the most cognitively complex jobs. The addition of Stratum II

Stratum III
(general)

g

Gf

A. Carroll Three-Strata Model

Gc

Gy

Gc

SAR
Gsm

Stratum II (broad)

Gv

Gu

Gr

Gs

Carroll and Cattell-Horn Broad Ability Correspondence
(vertically-aligned ovals represents similar broad domains)

Gf

80+ Stratum I (narrow) abilities have been
identified under the Stratum II broad abilities. They
are not listed here due to space limitations

B. Cattell-Horn Extended Gf-Gc Model
Gf

Gv

TSR
Glm

Ga

Gs

CDS

Grw

Gq

C. Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Integrated Model
D. Tentatively identified Stratum II (broad)
domains

g
Gf

Gc

Gsm

Gv

Ga

Glr

Gs

Gt

Grw

Gq

Gkn

Gh

Gk

Go

Gp

Gps

(Missing g-to-broad ability arrows acknowledges that Carroll and Cattell-Horn disagreed on the validity of the general factor)

CHC Broad (Stratum II) Ability Domains
Gf
Gc
Gsm
Gv
Ga
Glr
Gs
Gt
Grw
Gq

Fluid reasoning
Comprehension-knowledge
Short-term memory
Visual processing
Auditory processing
Long-term storage and retrieval
Cognitive processing speed
Decision and reaction speed
Reading and writing
Quantitative knowledge

Gkn
Gh
Gk
Go
Gp
Gps

General (domain-specific) knowledge
Tactile abilities
Kinesthetic abilities
Olfactory abilities
Psychomotor abilities
Psychomotor speed

Figure 16.1 Schematic Representation and Comparisons of Carroll’s ThreeStrata, Cattell-Horn’s Extended Gf-Gc, and the integrated Cattell-Horn-Carroll
Models of Human Cognitive Abilities
Reprinted from Intelligence, 37(1), CHC theory and the human cognitive abilities project: Standing on the
shoulders of the giants of psychometric intelligence research, 1–10. Copyright (2008) with permission
from Elsevier.

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

455

abilities adds little to the prediction equation and then only for certain types
of jobs (e.g., spatial ability for architects). Gottfredson cautioned counselors
not to ignore speciﬁc abilities, but to understand the utility of general
cognitive ability across work tasks and settings.
Psychometric theories focus on the structure of cognitive abilities and
try to identify those that contribute to overall intelligence. In the context
of career counseling, cognitive abilities are necessary but not sufﬁcient to
predict occupational or educational success and performance. Clients will
also need practical and social skills to succeed in the workplace. Thus,
the cognitive-contextual theories of intelligence bear mention. Sternberg,
Kaufman, and Grigorenko (2009) recently provided a componential subtheory of intelligence (i.e., ‘‘successful intelligence’’), deﬁned as ‘‘the ability to
achieve success in life, given one’s personal standards, within one’s sociocultural context’’ (p. 72). Included in this model is the ability to capitalize on
strengths and remediate weaknesses. In their model, intelligence is viewed as
adapting to, selecting, and shaping one’s environment (e.g., solving conﬂicts
at work, integrating feedback, collaborating with others).
Gardner (1983, 1999) also proposed a contextual theory of intelligence
that highlights seven relatively independent intelligences: linguistic, logicalmathematical, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, spatial, interpersonal, and intrapersonal. More recently, Gardner (1999) supplemented this list with three
additional intelligences: naturalistic, spiritual, and existential. Finally, theories of emotional intelligence have been proffered to emphasize the
importance of perceiving, integrating, understanding, and regulating emotions. More speciﬁcally, emotions are sources of information that can be used
to navigate social contexts. Although contextual theories of intelligence do
not yield easily testable claims (Gardner, 2011), they offer worthy discussion
points with clients as additional information to use in considering occupational options and diagnosing sources of work-performance problems.
Stability of Abilities
Large-scale, longitudinal studies have demonstrated that cognitive abilities
tend to be highly stable over time. Honzik, MacFarlane, and Allen (1948)
assessed intelligence at ages 8 and 18 and found the test–retest correlation
to be .70. In another study, an intelligence test was given at ages 4, 14, and
29. The test–retest correlation at age 14 was .64; at adulthood, it was .80
(Bradway & Thompson, 1962). Mortensen and Kleven (1993) found very
high stability quotients from middle to late adulthood (r = .90). Finally, raw
stability coefﬁcients calculated for intelligence tests administered between
ages 11–70, 11–79, and 11–87 were .67, .66, and .51, respectively (Gow et al.,
2011). This body of research suggests that at least 50% of the variance in

456

Career Development and Counseling

late-life cognitive performance can be attributed to childhood cognitive
ability (p. 237) and that people who score high in comparison to same-age
peers on a particular ability will remain among the highest scorers compared
to same-age peers on that ability 10, 20, and 30 years later. These data provide
support for the use of ability assessments in career counseling because they
suggest that abilities assessed at one point in a client’s life can be used to
make predictions about the types of occupations in which a person might be
successful later in life.
Gender Differences
Questions regarding gender differences in abilities cannot be easily answered
(Williams & Ceci, 2007). The long-standing notion that men excel on quantitative measures and women on verbal measures is an oversimpliﬁcation of
ﬁndings. In fact, observed differences are dependent on a number of factors,
such as age, ethnicity, nationality, being tested on familiar or novel material,
and historical time period (Priess & Hyde, 2010). Many different abilities
comprise quantitative ability (e.g., computations, arithmetic reasoning) and
verbal ability (e.g., vocabulary, verbal reasoning), and although relatively
stable, abilities can be fostered and new skills learned. Further, it is important
to examine participants’ location in the distribution of scores; larger gender
differences are frequently observed in extremely bright or talented individuals and may be washed out in a group of average-performing individuals.
Moreover, careful attention has been paid in the design of intelligence and
aptitude tests to eliminate or balance questions that demonstrate gender bias
(Priess & Hyde, 2010).
In samples representative of the general population, gender differences
in overall IQ scores tend to be small or nonsigniﬁcant (Dreary, Thorpe,
Wilson, Starr, & Whalley, 2003; Priess & Hyde, 2010). There are however,
gender differences in performance on subtests. For example, on commonly
used intelligence tests, boys and men tend to perform better than girls and
women on tests of spatial ability, girls and women perform slightly better
in verbal ability, and boys and men perform slightly better in quantitative
ability. However, taking a closer look at the data may blur these notions.
When ‘‘quantitative ability’’ is further broken down, there is evidence that
girls excel at quantitative computation at a very early age, and boys excel at
mathematical reasoning in adolescence (Fennema, 1974; Halpern, 1986).
Meta-analytic studies can also shed light on gender differences and similarities. Using 100 studies, Hyde, Fennema, and Lamon (1990) conducted
a meta-analytic investigation of gender differences in math ability. They
found that in a general population, women had slightly better mathematics
performance than men. They replicated previous work that showed girls

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

457

and women are slightly better at computation and boys and men at problem
solving. With respect to gender differences across racial/ethnic groups, these
researchers found no gender differences in African American or Hispanic
populations, but in Asian American samples, girls and women performed
slightly better than boys and men. Note that all of these gender differences
are quite small in a practical sense. Although there is evidence that gender
differences in average mathematical performance have decreased over time
(Hyde, Lindberg, Linn, Ellis, & Williams, 2008), there remains considerable
variation in the ratio of boys to girls in the tails of the distribution, with
boys being more highly represented in the top 10% and 5%. With respect
to verbal ability, the gender differences are small, consistent internationally,
and apparently shrinking over time (Hyde & Linn, 1988). Girls continue to
be overrepresented in the top 10% and 5% of verbal ability distributions as
compared to boys.
Cultural Differences
Addressing cultural differences in ability assessment is no easy task. The
study of differences in cognitive ability has spanned the ﬁelds of psychology,
anthropology, biology, and sociology, with no universally accepted deﬁnition or measurement tools (Eysenck, 1998). Scholars continue to passionately
debate the nature, origins, and practical implications of differences according
to group membership. For example, some have used claims of group differences in cognitive ability to rationalize racial discrimination; others have
made policy recommendations and sought legislation to provide speciﬁc
groups with resources (Neisser et al., 1996).
Ethnic group differences in ability have been studied by examining mean
scores on intelligence tests, mostly at the level of g (Neisser et al., 1996).
Although some differences exist, Neisser and colleagues (1996) suggest that
in working with a client, the individual’s score is more important than
the mean score of a client’s reference group. At the same time, because
measures of cognitive ability are used to make high-stakes decisions, it is
also important to know the validity of inferences made from these tests
and whether test scores relate to performance criteria equally well for each
racial/ethnic subgroup (Jencks & Phillips, 1998). A conventional method for
examining these potential differences is to compare the slopes and intercepts
of regression lines across groups. With respect to children in the school
system, studies have demonstrated no differences in validity coefﬁcients or
intercepts for racial/ethnic subgroups in predicting academic achievement
(e.g., Canivez & Watkins, 1998; Weiss & Priﬁtera, 1995; Weiss, Priﬁtera, &
Roid, 1993). Thus, cognitive ability tests given in early childhood seemed
to predict subsequent academic achievement equally well for European

458

Career Development and Counseling

Americans, African Americans, Latinos, and Asian Americans. These ﬁndings are consistent in the workforce as well—there seems to be no predictive
bias (slope and intercept differences) between cognitive ability tests in
common use in practice and work performance (Rotundo & Sackett, 1999;
Schmidt, Pearlman, & Hunter, 1980).
There is evidence that schooling can impact intelligence test scores (Ceci,
1991). For example, attendance at school can promote learning that leads
to higher test scores, promotion from one grade to the next, and academic persistence (Neisser et al., 1996). Therefore, the quality of a client’s
school experience may be salient. Clients from low socioeconomic backgrounds may have attended poorer school systems and, subsequently, may
have had fewer educational opportunities and resources than those who
attended school systems in wealthier neighborhoods with a higher tax base.
Although race/ethnicity is not directly linked to socioeconomic status, economically disadvantaged schools tend to have larger populations of ethnic
minority students.
Self-Estimated Abilities
Theories of career development highlight the important role of self-concept
(Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996) and individual perceptions of abilities (Lent,
Brown, & Hackett, 1994) in career decision making and performance. Thus,
objective measures of ability assessment (on which much of the research we
have discussed so far is based) may be considered incomplete, as they do
not address self-perceptions and tap only a limited number of abilities (e.g.,
they do not assess social abilities). Self-estimates of ability may provide a
systematic and efﬁcient way to complete the picture.
Ability self-estimates may be assessed through an interview, checklist, or
card sort. The most straightforward way to ﬁnd out about clients’ perceptions
of their abilities is to ask them directly (expressed abilities). One can also get
information about abilities clients have demonstrated in the past (manifested
abilities) by asking questions such as, ‘‘What subjects did you excel in at
school?’’ ‘‘If I asked your former boss to list your strengths, what would
she say?’’ ‘‘What skills do you think are needed for this job?’’ and ‘‘How
would I know you had this skill?’’ In some cases, clients have had numerous
educational and work experiences that provided them with feedback on
their strengths and liabilities. In other cases, clients may struggle to list more
than three skills.
Another self-assessment tool that may be slightly more helpful is a
skills checklist. A skills checklist can be downloaded from many online
sources such as State job centers (e.g., http://www.wisconsinjobcenter.org
/publications/8961), college career centers (e.g., http://owl.english.purdue
.edu/owl/resource/626/01) or comprehensive online career guidance

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

459

systems (e.g., http://www.onetonline.org/ﬁnd/descriptor/browse/skills).
Clients can be shown a list of skills and asked to identify the ones they
currently possess. Counselors can then engage clients in a conversation
about skills they have (e.g., how they demonstrate these skills, how they can
incorporate them into their resume, how they can talk about their skills with
employers) and skills they need to develop. A skill deﬁcit may point to a
need for additional education or training.
In addition to an interview or checklist, a card-sort activity can be used
to help clients examine their skills. There are several commercially available
card sorts (e.g., Motivated Skills Card Sort–Revised; Knowdell, 1990), but
counselors can also create their own card sort by writing each skill from
a skills checklist on separate index cards. Clients can then be instructed to
go through the deck of cards and make three piles: one to designate skills
they feel highly proﬁcient in, one to designate adequate competence, and
a third to designate little or no skill. The results should then be discussed
with the client. For example, the client may be asked about relationships
between skills they are proﬁcient in and those they enjoy using, if they are
able to use these skills in their current job, or if it would be important to
them to seek a job in which they could use these skills. Card sorts can also be
used to explore the accuracy of ability percepts by asking clients about the
bases for their assessment and asking them to share their results with, and
gain feedback from, others who know them (e.g., Brown & Lent, 1996; Lent,
Chapter 5, this volume).
Finally, more formal, standardized ability self-estimate measures have
been developed, including the Ability Explorer (Harrington & Harrington,
1996), Inventory of Work Relevant Abilities (IWRA; ACT, 1998), Self-Directed
Search (SDS; Holland, Powell, & Fritzsche, 1994), and the Campbell Interest
and Skills Survey (Campbell, Hyne, & Nilsen, 1992). One advantage of using
these measures of ability self-estimates versus interviews, skills checklists,
and card sorts is that these measures have been designed to generate
occupational and educational options for clients, many of which the client
might not have previously known about or considered. Thus, objective tests
and these formal ability self-estimates may expand career options for clients,
especially among those with limited knowledge about and experience in the
occupational world.
However, there are challenges to using self-estimates of ability. Selfestimates may not correlate strongly with objective ability scores (Gati,
Fishman-Nadav, & Shiloh, 2006; Mabe & West, 1982). Ability self-estimates
may also be subject to distortion due to inadequate or limited experience, response style, intentional self-promotion, and cheating (Prediger,
2002). Women may underestimate their abilities, and men may overestimate
them (Betsworth, 1999). Further, those who have lower measured intelligence may overestimate their abilities (Gati et al., 2006). At the same time,

460

Career Development and Counseling

self-perceived ability is important in career counseling as it may determine
career interests, expected success, and anticipated satisfaction (Barak, 1981;
Barak, Librowsky, & Shiloh, 1989). Barak, Shiloh, and Haushner (1992) found
that interests could be modiﬁed by altering perceived ability. For instance,
a client with low and inaccurate ability estimates could be confronted with
objective evidence disconﬁrming these perceptions (e.g., grades, test scores).
Lent and Brown (1996) describe strategies for challenging clients’ self-efﬁcacy
belief estimates (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
The advantages to using informal ability assessments are that they may be
free or low-cost, easy and quick to administer, and less stressful for clients
than formal assessments (Niles & Harris-Bowlsbey, 2009). However, major
disadvantages to informal ability assessments include a lack of scientiﬁc
rigor and the inability to generate occupational and educational options for
further exploration. Thus, more formal assessments (be they objective tests
or ability self-estimates) may be especially helpful for clients with limited
knowledge about work. Formal assessments for these clients may generate
options that they never heard about or previously considered. Niles and
Harris-Bowlsbey (2009) described additional reasons for implementing formal career assessments. First, formal assessments are supported by data and
provide evidence of validity and reliability. Second, there is a standard way
to interpret the results. This allows the counselor to compare a client’s results
with a norm reference group. Third, because formal assessments report the
populations for which the instrument has been tested and normed, counselors can determine the appropriateness of the instrument for their clients.
Prior to selecting any of these assessment tools, counselors are encouraged
to review assessment and counseling competencies and responsibilities (see
Krieshok & Black, 2009). Minimally, counselors should have coursework in
psychological measurement and assessment, as well as training or experience with the speciﬁc instrument they intend to use. It is also necessary
for counselors to consult the test’s manual to examine the development of
the measure; recommended uses and possible misuses; evidence of validity,
reliability, and fairness; and the composition of norm groups. Instructions for
administration, scoring, and interpretation are also included in the test manual or user’s guide. In addition to information provided in the test manual,
counselors can consult independently published test reviews to determine if
the instrument is suitable for the intended use (e.g., Maddox, 2008; Murphy,
Plake, Impara, & Spies, 2001; Spies, Carlson, & Geisinger, 2010).
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE ABILITY ASSESSMENT
Abilities, aptitudes, and skills have been associated with career counseling since the inception of Parson’s (1909) trait-and-factor approach. As

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

461

reviewed by Swanson and Schneider (Chapter 2, this volume), trait-andfactor approaches assume that abilities can be objectively measured and
correlated with job requirements to predict success. Early approaches to
career counseling focused on assessing an individual’s strengths and weaknesses to determine potential for speciﬁc types of work. Currently, this
information is viewed as one component of self-knowledge that can be
used in vocational exploration, decision making, self-promotion, and career
management.
The following sections describe how counselors can use ability assessment
with their clients. In high school settings, ability assessment is used to provide
an accurate appraisal of strengths and weaknesses and promote a connection between this self-knowledge and the world of work. Ability assessment
is further used to help students set educational goals, select appropriate
coursework, and prepare for transitions to college or the workforce. In
college settings, ability assessment is used to make admissions decisions,
place students in remedial and accelerated classes, facilitate major-choice
and occupational decisions, and prepare students for transition to the workforce. Similarly, ability assessment can help adults explore careers, make
decisions, and prepare for the workforce. For those already in the workforce,
ability assessment may be used to aid career transitions, self-promotion, and
career management.
Strategies, Methods, and Tools for Working
With High School Students
Barton and Coley (2011) suggest that there are unprecedented challenges
to preparing high school students for higher education and the world of
work. For example, there is debate as to the purpose and mission of public
education. In 1893, the consensus was that all high school students should
receive a college-focused curriculum irrespective of postgraduation aspirations. The pendulum then swung toward a choice-based model in which
students could identify different curricular pathways based on the desire to
attend college or immediately enter the workforce. Unfortunately, assignment replaced choice, and subgroups of students were rigidly tracked into
college-bound or workforce-bound paths. As a response, the school system promoted choice through the proliferation of course offerings. Students
were now able to choose between multiple courses that would meet educational requirements. Reactions spurred the phrase ‘‘the shopping mall high
school’’ (Powell, Farrar, & Cohen, 1985). Educational reform efforts then
began to emphasize the ‘‘new basics’’ (English, science, math, social studies,
and computer science) and proﬁciency standards that led to the test-based
accountability movement (e.g., No Child Left Behind Act of 2001).

462

Career Development and Counseling

A more recent strategy to promote educational achievement can be seen
in a growing emphasis on college and career readiness. The Race to the Top
legislation, along with widespread state efforts to link primary, secondary,
and postsecondary education systems, are intended to promote college and
workforce readiness for all students (Education Week, 2011). For example,
ACT deﬁnes college and career readiness through a system of assessment
and curricular support. This system includes the EXPLORE, PLAN, and
ACT tests.
EXPLORE. The EXPLORE test (ACT, 2011) was designed for use with eighthand ninth-grade students. It includes two components. The ﬁrst is related to
career and education planning and incorporates an interest inventory and
a needs assessment. The second component is a curriculum-based achievement test that includes four 30-minute multiple-choice sections measuring
knowledge and skills in English (usage/mechanics and rhetoric), math
(prealgebra, algebra, geometry, and statistics/probability), reading (comprehension), and science (reasoning). The EXPLORE test is developmentally
and conceptually linked to the PLAN and ACT tests such that scores on one
can be used to predict scores on another. The technical characteristics of the
EXPLORE test can be found in the technical manual (ACT, 2011).
The EXPLORE test is a paper-and-pencil test that takes approximately
2 to 3 hours. It can be administered year-round, but schools typically
identify a testing window. ACT provides test preparation materials and
sample test questions in addition to a technical manual and interpretive
guide. Individualized score reports are divided into four sections. The Your
Scores section provides (a) individual scores for English, Math, Reading, and
Science; (b) a composite score; (c) percentile ranks for each score; and (d) an
estimate PLAN composite score range. The Your Plans section highlights
reported academic plans, career cluster preferences, planning needs, and
estimated college readiness as demonstrated by a comparison to appropriate
grade-level benchmark scores. A section titled Your Career Possibilities shows
how speciﬁc career interests map onto the World-of-Work Map (see Gore
et al., Chapter 18, this volume). Finally, Your Skills is a section that offers
recommendations for developing skills in each of the tested competency
areas. Counselors can use EXPLORE results to help students understand their
strengths and weaknesses, develop educational goals, explore occupational
possibilities, and ensure a college-ready trajectory.
PLAN. The PLAN test (ACT, 2007b) was designed for use with 10th-grade
students. It mirrors the EXPLORE test with respect to content, test administration, individualized score reports, and how to use the results. The technical

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

463

characteristics of the PLAN test can be found in the technical manual
(ACT, 2007b).
ACT. The ACT (ACT, 2007a) is a 215-item, multiple-choice achievement test
designed for use with 11th- and 12th-grade students. It is similar to EXPLORE
and PLAN in that it is comprised of a career and educational planning
component and a curricular-based test that measures learning in four content
domains: English (usage/mechanics, rhetoric), Math (prealgebra, algebra,
intermediate algebra, geometry/plane geometry, trigonometry), Reading
(social studies, natural sciences, prose ﬁction, humanities), and Science (data
representation, research summaries, conﬂicting viewpoints). There is an
optional writing component. The technical characteristics of the ACT test
can be found in the technical manual (ACT, 2007a).
The ACT test is a paper-and-pencil test that takes approximately 4 to
5 hours. It is administered only at registered test sites on speciﬁc test dates.
ACT provides numerous test preparation materials on its Web site (e.g., a
downloadable brochure, an ACT question of the day, and an online test
preparation program.). ACT score reports display individual test scores
for the four primary domains (English, Math, Reading, Science), seven
subscales within these domains, and the writing component. A composite
score is calculated from the average of scores on the four primary domains.
This score ranges from 1 to 36 and is used by colleges to make highstakes admissions decisions. National and state percentile ranks for the
primary domains, subscales, composite, and writing score are provided to
numerically represent the percentage of recent high school graduates that
scored at or below the test taker. Counselors can help students compare their
ACT scores to the national or state norms, match them to the requirements
of colleges, and assess strengths and weaknesses. Further, scores can be used
to determine college readiness. ACT has created benchmark scores for the
four primary domains. These scores represent the minimum score needed to
obtain a 50% chance of obtaining a B or higher in a ﬁrst-year college course.
Counselors can help students compare their scores to the benchmarks and
suggest additional coursework or remediation. The last page of the ACT
score report lists interest inventory results and can be used to help students
explore careers and college majors.
SAT. The SAT (College Board, 2011) is a 171-item aptitude test designed
for use with 11th- and 12th-grade students. The purpose of the SAT test
is to demonstrate a student’s potential to succeed in college, and it is
therefore used for high-stakes admissions decisions. As described previously, an aptitude test measures how well a student can process verbal

464

Career Development and Counseling

and quantitative information, solve problems, and think critically. Aptitude
tests capture a student’s capacity for learning; achievement tests measure
knowledge associated with a speciﬁc curriculum. Questions on the SAT
measure three domains: Critical Reading, Writing, and Math. The reading
component assesses a student’s ability to understand vocabulary, synthesize information, and draw inferences from short and long passages. The
writing component is divided into two sections: multiple-choice questions
(identifying errors in grammar and usage) and a short essay. The math
component measures a student’s ability to apply mathematical concepts to
solve problems and interpret tables, charts, and graphs. Students can also
choose to take hour-long subject tests. There are 20 subject tests in all that
cover ﬁve general areas: English (e.g., literature), history, languages (e.g.,
German, German With Listening), math, and science (e.g., biology). Kobrin,
Patterson, Shaw, Mattern, and Barbuti (2008) provide evidence of predictive
validity for the newest version of the SAT.
The SAT test is a paper-and-pencil test that takes approximately 3 to
4 hours. It is administered only at registered test sites on speciﬁc test dates.
The College Board provides numerous test preparation materials on their
Web site (e.g., a study guide, question of the day, full practice test, and
an online test preparation program). Students receive a score report that
provides detailed information about their performance. The Score Report
Summary outlines their results for each of the three primary domains. Scores
range from 200 to 800. Thus, an SAT composite score (all three primary
domains combined) ranges from 600 to 2400. Students are also able to see
how many questions they answered correctly, incorrectly, and omitted for
each of the primary domains and the corresponding subscales. Further,
students are shown how their scores compare to other students in their
school, state, and the nation.
Strategies, Methods, and Tools for Working With
College Students
Ability assessment does not end once a student is accepted into college.
A number of states have a placement assessment policy requiring their
colleges to assess the academic skills of incoming students and place them in
developmentally appropriate courses. Other states allow colleges to set their
own policies regarding placement tests. ACCUPLACER and COMPASS are
the two most commonly used standardized placement tests. ACCUPLACER
(College Board) is a computer-adaptive test that measures knowledge and
skills in math, English, reading, and writing. Similar to ACCUPLACER,
COMPASS (ACT) is an untimed, computerized test that evaluates the same
four areas of development. Neither test has a passing score. Rather, scores

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

465

indicate areas of strength and weakness and help admissions counselors or
academic advisors schedule appropriate coursework.
In college, ability assessment may be used to help students navigate
various stages of career development (e.g., developing self-knowledge,
obtaining educational and occupational information, exploring occupational possibilities, making decisions, developing job search skills, gaining
relevant experience, applying to graduate school, networking, and securing employment). Formal or informal ability assessment may take place
in a variety of contexts, such as credit-bearing career courses; ﬁrst-year
experience seminars; individual or group counseling settings; academic
advising; special programs for minorities, women, or individuals with disabilities; programming in residence life; leadership development programs;
or computer-assisted career guidance. In this section, two ability assessments
will be described. Readers are also directed to the following section on ability
assessment with adults for tools that are also useful for college students and
work-bound youth.
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey. The Campbell Interest and Skill Survey
(CISS; Campbell, Hyne, & Nilsen, 1992) is an assessment tool that is frequently used with college-age persons to help them identify their skills
and interests and to make future educational and occupational plans. The
CISS is described in detail in Chapter 14 of this volume, and the reader is
referred to this chapter for detailed information on the CISS. With information on both interest level and skills conﬁdence, counselors can help students
explore additional career options or narrow their occupational alternatives.
Counselors should analyze discrepancies between scores on interest and
skill ratings to ensure the clients are not underestimating their self-efﬁcacy
beliefs and possibly foreclosing on occupations that may be rewarding. For
example, there is a solid literature base implicating low self-efﬁcacy beliefs
and perceived barriers in the underrepresentation of women in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines.
Graduate Record Exam. The Graduate Record Exam (GRE; Educational Testing Service, 2011) is an aptitude test that measures an individual’s ability
to perform graduate-level work. Thus, it is typically required by graduate
programs as part of the admissions application. The three sections include
Verbal Reasoning (analyzing, synthesizing, understanding relationships),
Quantitative Reasoning (problem solving related to mathematical operations), and Analytical Writing (critical thinking and writing skills). The test
format may be computer based or paper based, depending on the test location. The GRE takes approximately 3 hours and 45 minutes to complete.

466

Career Development and Counseling

In August 2011, the GRE introduced new questions and score scales. The
Verbal Reasoning and Quantitative Reasoning scores are now reported on
a scale of 130–170, in 1-point increments; the Analytical Writing score is
reported on a 0–6 score scale with half-point increments. Validity evidence indicates the GRE measures appropriate content, has minimal adverse
consequences, and predicts success in graduate school (e.g., Bridgeman,
Burton, & Cline, 2008). Employing meta-analytic strategies to combine the
results of multiple individual studies, Kuncel, Hezlett, & Ones (2001) found
small to moderate correlations between GRE scale scores and important graduate academic outcomes. Speciﬁcally, the Verbal, Quantitative, and Analytic
subtests were all positively correlated with graduate school GPA (ρ = .34,
.32, and .36, respectively) and faculty ratings of research ability, professional
work, potential, and overall performance (ρ = .42, .47, and .35, respectively).
The Verbal subtest was the strongest predictor of scores on the comprehensive exam (ρ = .44) and time to completion (ρ = .28). Counselors may need
to help students interpret their results and determine if their score is strong
enough to apply for speciﬁc graduate programs. Discussion may incorporate
management of test-taking anxiety, helpful study strategies, the location of
study materials, or ways to strengthen other aspects of the graduate school
application (e.g., personal statement, letters of recommendation).
Strategies, Methods, and Tools for Working With Adults
Formal or informal ability assessment can be used in conjunction with other
assessment tools (e.g., interests, values) to help adult clients explore career
possibilities and make effective career decisions or transitions. They can
also be used to help adolescents and young adults identify their primary
skills and abilities and to generate occupational possibilities. As indicated
earlier, a major advantage of formal ability assessment is that it can help
clients expand their knowledge of the occupational world and generate
occupational possibilities they may not have previously thought about.
Thus, formal ability assessments may be particularly helpful for persons
with a limited knowledge of and exposure to the occupational world or
those who have been outside the paid work force for an extended period
of time (e.g., homemakers, prisoners, those on religious missions). Ability
assessment can also be essential in identifying transferable skills and can be
used to identify congruent occupational titles for those wanting to remain
within their ﬁeld but in a different setting (e.g., geographic move, layoff,
dismissal) or to identify alternate occupations for those seeking to leave their
ﬁeld. Further, ability assessment can be used to determine the capacity to
perform essential job functions and to identify workplace accommodations.
Finally, ability assessment can corroborate or dispute self-appraisals and

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

467

be used to enhance work performance. Three formal ability assessment
instruments are described here. Readers are directed to Whitﬁeld, Feller, and
Wood (2009) for additional measures.
O*NET Ability Proﬁler. The Occupational Information Network (O*NET)
Ability Proﬁler (U.S. Department of Labor, 2009; see http://www.onetcenter
.org) is a multiple-aptitude battery that supplanted earlier Department of
Labor instruments such as the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB, U.S.
Department of Labor, 1970). It provides a series of 11 separately timed tests
that measure nine basic abilities important in the workforce: verbal ability,
arithmetic reasoning, computation, spatial ability, form perception, clerical
perception, motor coordination, manual dexterity, and ﬁnger dexterity. Six
sections are administered in paper-and-pencil format (e.g., arithmetic reasoning, vocabulary, three-dimensional space, computation, name comparison,
and object matching) and ﬁve sections include psychomotor exercises (mark
making, place, turn, assemble, and disassemble). The O*NET Ability Proﬁler
was designed for clients who are at least 16 years old and able to read English
at a sixth-grade level or higher.
All of the materials needed to administer the Ability Proﬁler can be
downloaded free from the Web site (i.e., instrument packet, administration
manual, training manual, computer scoring program, and scoring guide).
Certiﬁcation and/or training is not required to administer the Ability Proﬁler, but to ensure successful administration, counselors should read and
study the training manual. Training seminars are also available through the
O*NET Academy. Administering all 11 timed sections takes approximately
2 1/2 hours. If the client is not seeking a job requiring manual dexterity, one
can omit those sections of the test.
The computerized scoring software produces a score report that displays
the client’s summary of scores and percentile ranks compared to a norm
reference sample of over 5,000 individuals representing diversity in terms
of gender, ethnicity, age, education level, and employment status. The
score report may provide valuable information about a client’s strengths
and weaknesses and how these compare to a nationwide sample. The
score report also provides a list of occupations that ﬁt the client’s ability
proﬁle according to job zone. Job zones designate the amount of education,
experience, and training that speciﬁc occupations require. For example,
occupations in Job Zone 1 require little or no preparation, while occupations
in Job Zone 5 require extensive preparation. All occupations in the O*NET
database have been coded according to job zone. The client’s ability proﬁle
will also produce a job zone classiﬁcation. This allows clients to search for
occupations within their speciﬁc job zone or explore occupations based on

468

Career Development and Counseling

their anticipated level of education or training. Once clients have a list of
occupations they would like to explore, they can be directed to the O*NET
OnLine, a detailed database of over 800 occupations (see Gore et al., Chapter
18, this volume). The O*NET Ability Proﬁler can be used in conjunction
with the O*NET Interest Proﬁler and the O*NET Work Importance Proﬁler,
a measure of work values (see Rounds & Jin, Chapter 15, this volume).
CAPS. The Career Ability Placement Survey (CAPS; Knapp, Knapp, &
Knapp-Lee, 2003) is a multidimensional ability assessment tool designed to
measure eight vocationally relevant abilities: mechanical reasoning, spatial
relations, verbal reasoning, numerical ability, language usage, word knowledge, perceptual speed and accuracy, and manual speed and dexterity.
This measure was normed on middle, high school, and college students
and therefore may be appropriate for individuals ranging from sixth grade
through adulthood. The technical manual, examiner’s guide, self-scoring
booklets, self-interpretation proﬁles, and administration tape or CD can be
purchased from the Educational and Industrial Testing Service (EdITS) Web
site (http://www.edits.net). Data on the psychometric properties of the
measure are found in the technical manual.
The CAPS is administered in a paper-and-pencil format and takes approximately 50 minutes to complete. The test-taking materials are available in
English or Spanish. The test can be self-scored or machine scored by the
company. Summary scores and percentile ranks are provided for each of
the eight test sections, allowing clients to examine their abilities in relation
to others at their same educational level. Further, scores can be interpreted
with respect to the 14 COPSystem Career Clusters (e.g., Technology, Science,
Arts, Communication). This allows clients to explore occupational areas that
correspond to their present abilities and areas for which they may require
additional education or training. The CAPS is part of a comprehensive system
that includes a vocational interest inventory (Career Occupational Preference System, COPS) and a personal values inventory (Career Orientation
Placement and Evaluation Survey, COPES).
ASVAB. The Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Test Battery (ASVAB;
U.S. Department of Defense, 2005) is a multiaptitude 200-item test battery
that was originally designed to predict job performance in the military
and subsequently make enlistment decisions. Since that time, the Department of Defense has supplemented the original ASVAB by designing the
ASVAB Career Exploration Program, a comprehensive career exploration
and planning program aimed at connecting high school and college students
with satisfying employment in civilian or military occupations. Hence, there
are three versions of the ASVAB: (1) CAT-ASVAB, (2) MET-site ASVAB,

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

469

and (3) Student ASVAB. The ﬁrst two are speciﬁcally used for enlistment
purposes (Department of Defense, 2011). The CAT-ASVAB is a computer
adaptive test given at military entrance processing stations. The MET-site
ASVAB is a paper-and-pencil test given at mobile examination test sites. Each
exam is timed, employs a multiple-choice response format, and includes nine
subtests: General Science, Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge, Paragraph Comprehension, Mathematics Knowledge, Electronics Information,
Auto Information, Shop Information, and Mechanical Comprehension.
Score reports provide individual subtest scores, composite scores, and
the Armed Forces Qualiﬁcation Test (AFQT) score, which is a percentile
score based on a composite of the Arithmetic Reasoning, Math Knowledge,
Word Knowledge, and Paragraph Comprehension scores. Each of the service
branches sets minimum AFQT scores for enlistment. Other composite scores
on the ASVAB determine eligibility for speciﬁc career ﬁelds or military
occupations. A client who plans to enter a branch of the U.S. Armed Forces
or Coast Guard may want to take an ASVAB practice test and read about
ASVAB study techniques (see http://www.military.com/ASVAB).
The Student ASVAB is a paper-and-pencil test administered by Department of Defense test proctors or school counselors in participating high
schools, colleges, or vocational schools. It has the same nine subtests as
the other ASVAB tests but also includes a separate interest inventory. The
ASVAB Summary Results displays grade-speciﬁc standard scores, score
bands, and percentile ranks for each of the nine subtests as well as three
composites: verbal ability, math ability, and academic ability. The academic
ability composite assesses potential for postsecondary education. Similar to
the other versions of the ASVAB, test takers receive an AFQT score. Results
can be used to search both military and civilian occupations. Test scores
may be used by the Department of Defense for recruiting and research
purposes for up to 2 years. However, taking the Student ASVAB does not
necessitate entrance into the military. There are numerous advantages to
using this version of the ASVAB with student and adult clients. For example,
taking the measure is free for clients taking classes at a participating school.
Further, there are supplemental web-based and printed materials to help
clients use their test results to explore career possibilities and plan their
coursework. Moreover, the ASVAB has solid psychometric properties in
terms of reliability (Moore, Pedlow, Krishnamurty, & Wolter, 2000), validity
(Welsh, Kucinkas, & Curran, 1990), and test fairness (Wise et al., 1992).
CAREER MANAGEMENT
The work tasks carried out by the American labor force have drastically changed since the introduction of computers. Occupations using
complex communications, critical thinking, and problem solving have grown

470

Career Development and Counseling

exponentially while occupations requiring routine cognitive tasks and manual labor have declined (Levy & Murname, 2004). Trilling (2009) suggests
that we are in the midst of a ‘‘21st Century skills gap’’ that is ﬁnancially
burdensome to our economy as employers search worldwide to ﬁnd and
hire new employees who have the requisite skill set and do not require
extra training or development. He suggests that we need to start early
to educate and train our future workforce. Speciﬁcally, he identiﬁes work
skills that will be essential to demonstrate in the 21st century: (a) Learning
and Innovation (critical thinking and problem solving, communication, and
creativity), (b) Digital Literacy (information, media, and technical computer
skills), and (c) Life and Career Skills (ﬂexibility, adaptability, self-direction,
productivity, accountability, leadership, responsibility, and social and crosscultural interaction skills). The value placed on these skills can be seen
through educational legislation, national standards for school counselors
(ASCA 2004), state models of comprehensive guidance programming, and
more recently, competency-based instruction and assessment in the school
systems. Thus, ability assessment can help bridge the 21st-century skills
gap by ensuring that clients enter the job market with the necessary skills
to succeed.
Blustein (2006) describes how the psychological contract between
employee and employer has been transformed. Instead of expecting a longterm relationship in which responsibilities and pay increase over time (i.e.,
the corporate ladder), careers are being redeﬁned as protean, boundaryless,
and portfolio-based (Hall, 2002). Career transitions are not only possible but
also probable. Because career management is no longer an organizational
responsibility, it is imperative that counselors help their clients understand
the need to be proactive in their personal work trajectories. To maintain
marketability, workers can assess their abilities, needs, and preferences on a
regular basis, identify skill deﬁcits, and plan strategies to overcome these
gaps. Twenty-ﬁrst-century workers will want to remain ﬂexible, adaptable,
and willing to upgrade their skill sets. Ongoing ability assessment may
assist in career management.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Ability assessment may be used to expand career options, narrow options,
inform career decision making, and maintain employability. A few ﬁnal
thoughts that bear mention:
• Ability assessment can be used in conjunction with other measures of

individual differences (e.g., interests, values, personality) to provide

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

471

a more complete picture of the client. Abilities predict occupational
performance and success; interests and values predict occupational
satisfaction. Thus, counselors should help clients assess all three of these
important characteristics because a goal of career counseling is to help
clients enter work that they will ﬁnd satisfying and in which they will
perform adequately.
• Substandard work performance may be due, in part, to mismatching
abilities (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume). Thus,
it is important to help clients match their abilities with the ability
requirements of their jobs and to help them, if necessary, acquire
additional proﬁciency in their current jobs or ﬁnd jobs that are more
ability correspondent.
• Self-perceived abilities are important to consider in counseling because
they provide estimates of abilities that may not be measured by objective ability tests. Formal self-estimate tools, like objective ability tests,
have the advantage of generating occupational possibilities for clients
that informal ability assessments (e.g., expressed or manifested abilities,
checklists, and card sorts) do not. However, people may not be able to
accurately estimate their abilities. Thus, counselors need to help clients
evaluate the accuracy of their ability self-estimates. Several authors
(e.g., Tracey & Hopkins, 2001) have suggested that ability self-estimates
administered early in counseling may stimulate more complete occupational exploration than objective ability tests. The latter, if employed,
may be more useful in later stages of counseling when clients are
narrowing options.
• Contextual variables such as age, gender, ethnicity, ability status, and
SES should be addressed in the selection, interpretation, and use of
formal objective or ability self-estimate measures. Counselors should
review the test manual to determine the psychometric properties of the
test and appropriateness for speciﬁc clients (test fairness, potential for
adverse impact, etc.). Test interpretation should include a discussion
of cultural inﬂuences, as they may have inﬂuenced prior learning,
educational experiences, and current ability estimates. Further, cultural
inﬂuences may affect the career decision-making process, occupational
choices, goal setting, and goal-related behavior.
• Finally, ability assessment can foster career management through the
identiﬁcation of strengths and weaknesses and transferable skills. Counselors can help clients compare current abilities with the requirements
of a targeted position and make recommendations for amending skill
deﬁcits or promoting strengths.

472

Career Development and Counseling

REFERENCES
ACT. (1998). Career Planning Survey technical manual. Iowa City, IA: Author.
ACT. (2007a). ACT: Technical manual. Retrieved from http://www.act/org/aap
/pdf/ACT_Technical_Manual.pdf
ACT. (2007b). PLAN: Technical manual. Retrieved from http://www.act/org/plan
/downloads.html
ACT. (2011). EXPLORE: Technical manual. Retrieved from http://www.act.org
/explore/pdf/TechManual.pdf
Acton, G. S., & Schroeder, D. H. (2001). Sensory discrimination as related to general
intelligence. Intelligence, 29(3), 263–271.
American School Counselor Association. (2004). ASCA national standards for students.
Alexandria, VA: Author.
Anderson, D., Elliott, R., Paterson, D., Toops, H., & Heidbreder, E. (1930). Minnesota
Mechanical Ability Tests: The report of a research investigation subsidized by the
Committee on Human Migrations of the National Research Council and conducted in the
Department of Psychology of the University of Minnesota. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Barak, A. (1981). Vocational interests: A cognitive view. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
19, 1–14.
Barak, A., Librowsky, I., & Shiloh, S. (1989). Cognitive determinants of interests:
An extension of a theoretical model and initial empirical examinations. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 34, 318–334.
Barak, A., Shiloh, S., & Haushner, O. (1992). Modiﬁcation of interests through
cognitive restructuring: Test of a theoretical model in preschool children. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 39, 490–497.
Barton, P., & Coley, R. (2011). The mission of the high school: A new consensus of the
purposes of publish education? Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Services.
Betsworth, D. (1999). Accuracy of self-estimated abilities and the relationship
between self-estimated abilities and realism for women. Journal of Career Assessment, 7(1), 35–43.
Betz, N., Fitzgerald, L., & Hill, R. (1989). Trait-factor theories: Traditional cornerstone
of career theory. In M. Arthur, D. Hall, & B. Lawrence (Eds.), Handbook of career
theory (pp. 26–40). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The changing nature of work in the 21st century. In D. L.
Blustein (Ed.), The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling and public policy. New York, NY: Erlbaum.
Bradway, K., & Thompson, C. (1962). Intelligence at adulthood: A twenty-ﬁve year
follow-up. Journal of Educational Psychology, 53, 1–14.
Bridgeman, B., Burton, N., & Cline, F. (2008). Understanding what the numbers
mean: A straightforward approach to GRE predictive validity. (Report No. GREB
04-03ETS RR-08-46). Princeton, NJ: ETS.
Brody, E., & Brody, N. (1976). Intelligence: Nature, determinants, and consequences.
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44(4), 354–366.

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

473

Campbell, D. P., Hyne, S. A., & Nilsen, D. C. (1992). Manual for the Campbell Interest
and Skill Survey. Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems.
Canivez, G., & Watkins, M. (1998). Long-term stability of the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children–third edition. Psychological Assessment, 10(3), 285–291.
Carroll, J. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ceci, S. (1991). How much does schooling inﬂuence general intelligence and its
cognitive components? A reassessment of the evidence. Developmental Psychology,
27(5), 703–722.
College Board. (2011). Educator’s handbook for the SAT and the SAT subject tests.
Princeton, NJ: Author.
Crivellato, E., & Ribatti, D. (2007). Soul, mind, brain: Greek philosophy and the birth
of neuroscience. Brain Research Bulletin, 71(4), 327–336.
Dawis, R., Goldman, S., & Sung, Y. (1992). Stability and change in abilities for a
sample of young adults. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 52, 457–465.
Dreary, I., Thorpe, G., Wilson, V., Starr, J., & Whalley, L. (2003). Population sex
differences in IQ at age 11: The Scottish Mental Survey 1932. Intelligence, 31,
533–542.
Education Week. (2011). Uncertain forecast: Education adjusts to a new economic
reality. Quality Counts, 30(16), 1–70.
Educational Testing Service. (2011). GRE information and registration bulletin.
Princeton, NJ: Author. Retrieved from http://www.ets.org/s/gre/pdf/gre_info
_reg_bulletin.pdf
Eysenck, H. (1998). Intelligence: A new look. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Fennema, E. (1974). Mathematics learning and the sexes: A review. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 5(3), 126–139. doi:10.2307/748949
Fleishman, E., Costanza, D., & Marshall-Mies, J. (1999). Abilities. In N. Peterson,
M. Mumford, W. Borman, P. Jeanneret, & E. Fleishman (Eds.), An occupational
information system for the 21st century: The development of the O*NET (pp. 49–69).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, M. K. (2011). Theories of intelligence. In M. Bray & T. Kehle (Eds.),
The Oxford handbook of school psychology (pp. 79–100). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gati, I., Fishman-Nadav, Y., & Shiloh, S. (2006). The relations between preferences
for using abilities, self-estimated abilities, and measured abilities among career
counseling clients. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 24–38.
Gottfredson, L. (2003). The challenge and promise of cognitive career assessment.
Journal of Career Assessment, 11(2), 115–135.
Gow, A., Johnson, W., Pattie, A., Brett, C., Roberts, B., Starr, J., & Deary, I. (2011).
Stability and change in intelligence from age 11 to ages 70, 79, and 87: The Lothian
birth cohorts of 1921 and 1936. Psychology and Aging, 26(1), 232–240.

474

Career Development and Counseling

Hall, D. (2002). Careers in and out of organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Halpern, D. F. (1986). Sex differences in cognitive abilities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harrington, J., & Harrington, T. (1996). Ability explorer: Preliminary technical manual.
Chicago, IL: Riverside.
Holland, J., Powell, A., & Fritzsche, B. (1994). The self-directed search professional user’s
guide. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Honzik, M., MacFarlane, J., & Allen, L. (1948). The stability of mental test performance between two and eighteen years. Journal of Experimental Education, 17,
309–324.
Horn, J., & Cattell, R. (1996). Reﬁnement and test of the theory of ﬂuid and
crystallized general intelligences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57, 253–270.
Horn, J., & Hofner, S. (1992). Major abilities and development in the adult period. In
R. Sternberg & C. Berg (Eds.), Intellectual development (pp. 44–49). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Hunt, E. (2005). Information processing and intelligence: Where we are and where
we are going? In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Pretz (Eds.), Cognition and intelligence:
Identifying the mechanisms of the mind (pp. 1–25). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Hyde, J. S., Fennema, E., & Lamon, S. J. (1990). Gender differences in mathematics
performance: A meta-analysis, Psychological Bulletin, 107, 139–155.
Hyde, J. S., Lindberg, S., Linn, M., Ellis, A., & Williams, C. (2008). Gender similarities
characterize contemporary state assessments of mathematics performance. Science,
321, 494–495.
Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (1988). Gender differences in verbal ability: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 104, 53–69.
Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (1998). The Black-White test score gap. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.
Jensen, A. R. (2002). Galton’s legacy to research on intelligence. Journal of Biosocial
Science, 34(2), 145–172.
Knapp, L., Knapp, R., & Knapp-Lee, L. (2003). Career Ability Placement Survey:
Directions for administering and interpreting the CAPS. San Diego, CA: EdITS.
Knowdell, R. (1990). Motivated Skills Card Sort–revised. Camberwell, Australia: Career
Research & Testing.
Kobrin, J., Patterson, B., Shaw, E., Mattern, K., & Barbuti, S. (2008). Validity of the SAT
for predicting ﬁrst-year college grade point average (Report No. 2008–5). New York,
NY: College Board.
Krieshok, T., & Black, M. (2009). Assessment and counseling competencies and
responsibilities: A checklist for counselors. In E. Whitﬁeld, R. Feller, & C. Wood
(Eds.), A counselor’s guide to career assessment instruments (5th ed., pp. 61–68).
Broken Arrow, OK: National Career Development Association.
Kuncel, N., Hezlett, S., & Ones, D. (2001). A comprehensive meta-analysis of the
predictive validity of the Graduate Record Examination: Implications for graduate
school selection and performance. Psychological Bulletin, 127(1), 162–181.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44(4), 354–366.

Ability and Aptitude Assessment in Career Counseling

475

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 45, 79–122.
Levy, F., & Murnane, R. (2004). The new division of labor: How computers are creating
the next job market. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mabe, P., III, & West, S. (1982). Validity of self-evaluation ability: A review and
meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 280–296.
Maddox, T. (2008). Tests (6th ed.). Austin, Texas: Pro-ED.
McGrew, K. (2005). The Cattell-Horn-Carroll theory of cognitive abilities. In D. Flanagan & P. Harrison (Eds.), Contemporary intellectual assessment: Theories, tests, and
issues (2nd ed., pp. 136–181). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McGrew, K. (2009). CHC theory and the human cognitive abilities project: Standing
on the shoulders of the giants of psychometric intelligence research. Intelligence,
37, 1–10.
Miyazaki, I. (1981). China’s examination hell: The civil service examinations of imperial
China. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Moore, W., Pedlow, S., Krishnamurty, P., & Wolter, K. (2000). National longitudinal
survey of youth 1997 (NLSY97): Technical sampling report. Chicago, IL: National
Opinion Research Center.
Mortensen, E., & Kleven, M. (1993). A WAIS longitudinal study of cognitive development during the life span from ages 50 to 70. Developmental Neuropsychology, 9,
115–130.
Murphy, L., Plake, B., Impara, J., & Spies, R. (2002). Tests in print IV. Lincoln, NE:
Buros Institute of Mental Measurements.
Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T., Boykin, A., Brody, N., Ceci, S., . . . Urbina, S.
(1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist, 51, 77–101.
Niles, S., & Harris-Bowlsbey, J. (2009). Career development interventions in the 21st
century. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing a vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton, Mifﬂin.
Powell, A., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. (1985). The shopping mall high school: Winners and
losers in the educational marketplace. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Prediger, D. (2002). Abilities, interests, and values: Their assessment and their
integration via the World-of-Work Map. Journal of Career Assessment, 10(2),
209–232.
Priess, H. A., & Hyde, J. S. (2010). Gender and academic abilities and preferences.
In J. C. Chrisler & D. R. McCreary (Eds.), Handbook of gender research in psychology
(pp. 297–316). New York, NY: Springer.
Rotundo, M., & Sackett, P. (1999). Effect of rater race on conclusions regarding
differential prediction in cognitive ability tests. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(5),
815–822.
Schmidt, F., Pearlman, K., & Hunter, J. (1980). The validity and fairness of employment and educational tests for Hispanic Americans: A review and analysis.
Personnel Psychology, 33, 705–724.
Snow, R. (1994). Abilities and aptitudes. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human
intelligence (vol. 1, pp. 3–5). New York, NY: Macmillan.

476

Career Development and Counseling

Snow, R. (1996). Aptitude development and education. Psychology, Public Policy, and
Law, 2(3–4), 536–560.
Spearman, C. (1927). The abilities of man. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Spies, R., Carlson, J., & Geisinger, K. (Eds.). (2010). The eighteenth mental measurement
yearbook. Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental Measurements.
Sternberg, R., Kaufman, J., & Grigorenko, E. (2009). The essential Sternberg: Essays on
intelligence, psychology, and education. New York, NY: Springer.
Super, D., Savickas, M., & Super, C. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach to
careers. In D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.,
pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Thurstone, L. (1938). Primary mental abilities. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Tracey, T., & Hopkins, N. (2001). Correspondence of interests and abilities with
occupational choice. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48(2), 178–189.
Trilling, B., & Fadel, C. (2009). 21st century skills: Learning for life in our times. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
U.S. Department of Defense. (2005). ASVAB career exploration program: Counselor
manual. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Labor. (1970). Manual for the USES General Aptitude Test Battery.
Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Labor. (2009). Ability proﬁler user’s guide. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration.
Weiss, L., & Priﬁtera, A. (1995). An evaluation of differential prediction of WIAT
achievement scores from WISC-III FSIQ across ethnic and gender groups. Journal
of School Psychology, 33(4), 297–304.
Weiss, L., Priﬁtera, A., & Roid, G. (1993). The WISC-III and the fairness of predicting
achievement across ethnic and gender groups. In B. Bracken & R. McCallum
(Eds.), Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (3rd ed., pp. 35–42). Brandon, VT:
Clinical Psychology Publishing.
Welsh, J. R., Kucinkas, S. K., & Curran, L. T. (1990). Armed Services Vocational
Battery (ASVAB): Integrative review of validity studies (Technical Report No.
90–22). Brooks Air Force Base, TX: Air Force Systems Command.
Whitﬁeld, E., Feller, R., & Wood, C. (2009). A counselor’s guide to career assessment
instruments (5th ed., pp. 61–68). Broken Arrow, OK: National Career Development
Association.
Williams, W., & Ceci, S. (2007). Introduction: Striving for perspective in the debate
on women in science. In S. J. Ceci & W. M. Williams (Eds.), Why aren’t more women
in science? Top researchers debate the evidence (pp. 3–23). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Wise, L., Welsh, J., Grafton, F., Foley, P., Earles, J., Sawin, L., & Divgi, D. R. (1992).
Sensitivity and fairness of the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB)
technical composites. Seaside, CA: Defense Manpower Data Center.

C H A P T E R 17

Assessing Additional Constructs
Affecting Career Choice
and Development
PATRICK J. ROTTINGHAUS AND P. MAGGIE HAUSER

C

AREER COUNSELING CLIENTS OFTEN face tumultuous changes or seemingly

more mundane decision points with varying degrees of awareness
about themselves and the road ahead. Indeed, career choice
and development behaviors are inﬂuenced by complex sets of traits
(Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997), motives (Rottinghaus & Van Esbroeck,
2011), and developmental tasks, all occurring within an ever-changing
economy and multicultural context. Previous chapters have elaborated on
the importance of abilities, vocational interests, and work values. These
constructs are central to most career theories and career interventions.
However, the rich theory and research traditions in vocational psychology
offer a broader scope of additional factors critical to career-related behavior
that provide enhanced understanding of unique career challenges.
The present chapter extends the focus of career assessment to additional
client characteristics to which practitioners can attend as they seek a more
complete understanding of how clients adjust to changing circumstances
over time and across various transition points. In the ﬁrst edition of this
text, Swanson and D’Achiardi (2005) outlined factors beyond the ‘‘big three’’
(i.e., abilities, interests, needs/values), and we are charged to address the
same open-ended task. Guided by their work, we complement the topics they
covered by elaborating on certain constructs that received less attention (e.g.,
career adaptability) and provide updates on career assessment research and
practice since 2005. Moreover, we reference earlier theory chapters in this text
to highlight measures and assessment systems afﬁliated with major theories
477

478

Career Development and Counseling

(e.g., social cognitive career theory [SCCT], career construction theory) and
topics (e.g., diversity, social factors) that are crucial for career counseling
practice. The majority of this chapter elaborates on key domains that have
been well researched and have achieved established measures. Throughout
this chapter, we focus on speciﬁc measures and assessment strategies that
have received empirical support and that can enhance career counseling
practice. Finally, the chapter is organized into three major sections. In the
ﬁrst section, we use the major theories discussed in the ﬁrst section of this
book as an organizing scheme but focus speciﬁcally on constructs that are
not covered in the other assessment chapters. For example, in relation to
Donald Super’s theory of career development (see Hartung, Chapter 4, this
volume), we discuss the assessment of career maturity, adaptability, and
role salience. We also cover the assessment of vocational identity as a central
component of Holland’s theory (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume) and
self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome expectations, goals, supports, and barriers in
relation to SCCT (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
The second section of our chapter focuses on the assessment of constructs
that are used often in career counseling but are not necessarily aligned
with any speciﬁc theory. Included in this section are brief discussions of
the assessment of personality and decision-making difﬁculties. The third
section summarizes the chapter by providing a set of take-home messages to
practitioners on the choice and use of the assessment tools discussed in the
two prior sections. In all cases, we discuss only relatively psychometrically
sound measures and limit our discussion further to a few measures that are
relatively widely used in career research and counseling.
THEORY-DERIVED MEASURES
Unlike the atheoretical programs of research that led to prominent measures
of individual differences (e.g., interests, abilities), many career assessments
have been developed based on career development theories. We focus on the
assessment of a broad array of constructs, including career maturity, career
adaptability, self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, goals, and social roles that
relate to how people navigate the ever-changing occupational world.
Career Maturity and Career Adaptability
Whereas interests, abilities, and values are important characteristics related
to career planning, developmental theorists emphasize the process of career
development, or how careers evolve over time. Career maturity and career
adaptability generally incorporate the developmental tasks and strategies
involved in exploring, committing to, and executing career plans. Career

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

479

maturity involves readiness for planning one’s career and focuses on how
well adolescents meet developmental tasks involved in educational and
vocational decisions. Super’s (1955) research on processes involved in career
decision making highlighted the importance of attitudinal (i.e., planfulness,
exploration) and cognitive (i.e., decision-making, occupational knowledge)
dimensions of career maturity. Assessing these aspects of career development can inform practitioners about how well prepared, or ready, a
student is to make occupational choices. Traditional measures of these
dimensions include the Career Maturity Inventory (Crites & Savickas, 1996;
Savickas & Porfeli, 2011) and the Career Development Inventory (Savickas &
Hartung, 1996).
In 1979, Super and colleagues introduced the term career adaptability to
incorporate concerns of adult workers (Super & Kidd, 1979; Super & Knasel,
1979). Super and Knasel (1981) deﬁned career adaptability as the ‘‘readiness
to cope with changing work and working conditions’’ (p. 195). Given
the challenges presented by unstable occupational structures, individuals
must continually monitor and modify their ongoing career management
strategies, which entail adaptations. Therefore, researchers and practitioners
now emphasize how people cope with the challenges of navigating careers
in contemporary society. In addition to summarizing historical highlights of
career adaptability, this section features speciﬁc measures based on emerging
theory and research.
Building on the work of Donald Super, Savickas (1997) suggested that
career adaptability should replace career maturity as an integrative construct that connects disparate segments of career development and avoids
the limitations of a maturational framework while encompassing the major
components of ‘‘planful attitudes, self and environmental exploration, and
informed decision making’’ (p. 254). Savickas (2005) deﬁned career adaptability as ‘‘a psychosocial construct that denotes an individual’s readiness
and resources for coping with current and imminent vocational development tasks, occupational transitions, and personal traumas’’ (p. 51).
This self-regulatory process of attitudes, beliefs, and competencies encompasses individual dimensions of concern, control, curiosity, and conﬁdence
(Savickas, 2005), which informed the development of the Career AdaptAbilities measure explained later. Adaptive individuals embrace these
qualities as they navigate educational and career transitions. Each dimension encompasses a set of more speciﬁc attitudes, beliefs, competencies, and
afﬁliated coping behaviors that reﬂect adaptability (see Savickas, Chapter 6,
this volume).
Savickas (2011) uses his life story interview to identify themes drawn from
stories. However, the lack of agreed-upon operational deﬁnitions of career
adaptability has limited the applicability of this construct in research and

480

Career Development and Counseling

practice. In an attempt to address this concern, Creed, Fallon, and Hood
(2009) tested a model of career adaptability that was informed by extant
deﬁnitions emphasizing career planning, self-exploration, career exploration,
and decision making, conceptualized as self-regulatory mechanisms, in a
large sample of college students. This research yielded a good ﬁt for the
model comprising these components, which can inform the development of
quantitative career adaptability measures.
Bandura’s (2001, 2006b) scholarship on human agency relates to career
adaptability (Rottinghaus, Buelow, Matyja, & Schneider, 2012). Agency
involves a complex of four features: intentionality, forethought, selfreactiveness, and self-reﬂectiveness (Bandura, 2001). Career-related agency
reﬂects the internal motivation clients have to control and manage behaviors necessary to achieve favorable outcomes such as career transitions
(Rottinghaus et al., 2012). Bandura (2006b) captured important connections
between human agency and adaptability: ‘‘People who develop their
competencies, self-regulatory skills, and enabling beliefs in their efﬁcacy can
generate a wider array of options that expand their freedom of action, and
are more successful in realizing desired futures’’ (p. 165). The Career Futures
Inventory–Revised (CFI-R; Rottinghaus et al., 2012) emphasizes agency
within the context of career adaptability. Additional details on various career
maturity and adaptability measures follow.
Career Development Inventory. Growing out of the career pattern study and
ﬁrst published in 1979, the Career Development Inventory (CDI; Super,
Thompson, Lindeman, Jordaan, & Myers, 1981; Thompson & Lindeman,
1981) is a 120-item standardized measure of Super’s (1955) attitudinal and
cognitive dimensions of career maturity: Career Planning, Career Exploration, Decision Making, and World-of-Work Information. A ﬁfth scale,
Knowledge of Preferred Occupation, measures one’s knowledge regarding
typical duties and qualities of work for one of 20 occupational groups
selected by the respondent. Savickas and Hartung (1996) provide a thorough
analysis of the CDI, including a history of the development of the CDI’s
versions and a review of research.
Career Maturity Inventory. Crites (1961, 1973) developed the Career Maturity Inventory (CMI; originally called the Vocational Development
Inventory) from his ongoing longitudinal research program in the 1960s
examining readiness attitudes and career planning competencies involved
in making informed career plans. The CMI was revised in 1973, 1978,
1995, and most recently in 2011 (Crites & Savickas, 2011; available
at http://www.vocopher.com) to incorporate three of the four career

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

481

adaptability dimensions from career construction theory (i.e., Concern,
Curiosity, and Conﬁdence), as well as relational style in making occupational
decisions for students in grades 5–12. This new 24-item version, CMI (Form
C) includes ﬁve scores: A Total score comprising the three six-item career
adaptability measures, and a separate six-item Consultation Scale, which
measures relational style, or the degree to which clients seek information
and assistance related to career decision-making, ranging from independent
to interdependent. A supplemental guide explains the logic behind each
correct answer, which enables practitioners to ‘‘teach the test’’ to clients.
Savickas and Porfeli (2011) presented initial reliability and validity evidence
for the CMI (Form C) through conﬁrmatory factor analyses and relationships
with the Vocational Identity Scale (Holland & Holland, 1977). A 10-item
Screening Form version of the CMI is also available to obtain a ‘‘general level
of career choice readiness and decisional adaptability’’ (Savickas & Porfeli,
2011, p. 367) in large group settings. Savickas and Porfeli (2011) recommend
that individuals with lower scores should engage in broad exploration
activities (e.g., identity and values clariﬁcation interventions), whereas those
with higher scores should proceed with in-depth occupational exploration
(e.g., interest inventory interpretations).
Career Adapt-Abilities. The Career Adapt-Abilities Scale (CAAS; Savickas,
2011; Savickas & Porfeli, 2012) is a 24-item measure, comprised of 6 items
assessing perceptions of competence across four dimensions of career adaptability: concern, control, curiosity, and conﬁdence. Concern is ‘‘the extent
to which an individual is oriented to and involved in preparing for the
future’’; Control is ‘‘the extent of self-discipline as shown by being conscientious and responsible in making decisions’’; Curiosity is ‘‘the extent to
which an individual explores circumstances and seeks information about
opportunities’’; and Conﬁdence is ‘‘the extent of certitude that one has the
ability to solve problems and do what needs to be done to overcome obstacles’’ (Savickas & Porfeli, 2012, p. 664). Clients rate the degree to which
they have developed each of the 24 abilities, using a response scale ranging from Strongest (5) to Not Strong (1). The four scales demonstrated
acceptable internal consistency reliability, ranging from .74 (Control) to
.85 (Conﬁdence). A series of conﬁrmatory factor analyses supported the
factor structure of the measure. In addition, evidence suggests that the four
scales may be useful in countries beyond the United States: Research has
conﬁrmed the four-factor structure of the CAAS in 13 countries. Upon examining the structure and between-factor relationships, the authors have also
concluded that scores on the four factors can be combined to yield an overall
adaptability score.

482

Career Development and Counseling

Career Futures Inventory–Revised. Rottinghaus, Day, and Borgen (2005)
developed the original 25-item Career Futures Inventory (CFI) to assess
favorable views of the future and adaptability, yielding a three-factor measure that provides scores for career adaptability, career optimism, and perceived knowledge of the job market. The authors deﬁne career adaptability as
‘‘a tendency affecting the way an individual views his or her capacity to
plan and adjust to changing career plans and work responsibilities, especially in the face of unforeseen events’’ (p. 5). The 28-item Career Futures
Inventory–Revised (CFI-R; Rottinghaus et al., 2012) expanded the original
measure by incorporating components of Bandura’s (1986) personal agency
construct (i.e., self-awareness, control, and career transition self-efﬁcacy) and
relational aspects of career development. Thus, the revised Career Futures
Inventory provides scores on ﬁve scales measuring Career Agency, Occupational Awareness, Support, Work–Life Balance, and Negative Career
Outlook. Cronbach’s alpha internal consistency estimates for these scales
ranged from .78 (Work–Life Balance) to .90 (Career Agency). The CFI-R may
serve as an intake assessment tool to highlight clients’ needs and inform
counseling objectives. Researchers and administrators can use the CFI-R to
measure outcomes of individual or group career counseling or to evaluate
class interventions.
Vocational Identity
Next we examine the role of the self-concept or vocational identity as
an important aspect of career development. Super (1955) used the term selfconcept to refer to the views that individuals develop of themselves (e.g., their
interests, needs, goals, values, and salience of the work versus other roles)
that they attempt to implement in choosing occupational paths. Holland
(1997) used the term vocational identity to refer to the coherence of persons’
views of themselves. Both theorists hypothesized that these (self-concept
and vocational identity) views of the self are critical in promoting optimum
career development and aid in the career choice and adjustment process (see
Hartung, Chapter 4, and Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume).
Vocational identity has been widely researched and has yielded at least
one useful scale. Holland (1997) deﬁned vocational identity as ‘‘the possession of a clear and stable picture of one’s goals, interests, and talents’’
(p. 5). The Vocational Identity Subscale of Holland, Daiger, and Power’s
(1980) My Vocational Situation (MVS) is a sound measure of vocational
identity. The MVS Vocational Identity (VI) scale includes 18 true-false items
addressing how well clients have established a clear sense of various aspects
of their career plans. The MVS includes two additional items assessing
need for occupational information and potential barriers. The MVS can be

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

483

used as a needs assessment at intake to identify appropriate interventions.
For example, some clients may have developed a coherent vocational identity (as revealed by their scores on the VI scale) but report signiﬁcant barriers
in response to the Barriers items. This pattern of responses suggests that a
focus on identifying and overcoming barriers would be a central focus for
counseling. By contrast, counselors would help clients with low VI scores
to better understand and integrate their interests, values, abilities, and goals
into a coherent self-understanding.
Social Cognitive Career Theory Constructs
Building on insights from Bandura’s (1977, 1986) social cognitive theory,
Lent, Brown, and Hackett’s (1994) SCCT offers an array of well-researched
factors involved in interest development, career choices, academic and
career-related performance, and work satisfaction (see Lent, Chapter 5, this
volume). This section summarizes three interconnected constructs especially
emphasized from the SCCT perspective that are pivotal to assessment
and career counseling interventions: self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations,
and goals.
Self-efﬁcacy. Self-efﬁcacy is deﬁned as one’s perceived ability to organize and
execute courses of action to accomplish speciﬁc tasks (Bandura, 1977, 1986).
First applied to the career domain by Betz and Hackett (1981; Hackett &
Betz, 1981) and serving as a central feature in SCCT (Lent et al., 1994),
self-efﬁcacy is among the most widely studied career constructs. Numerous
specialized career self-efﬁcacy measures have been developed to assess
clients’ beliefs in their capacities to execute courses of action related to career
decision making (e.g., Career Decision Self-Efﬁcacy Scale, CDSE; Betz &
Taylor, 2001) and the career search process (Solberg, 1998). In addition, selfefﬁcacy for speciﬁc occupationally relevant content, typically organized by
Holland’s RIASEC themes or more speciﬁc dimensions (e.g., mathematics),
can be used by counselors to help clients gauge their perceived skills and
inform interventions to increase self-efﬁcacy through the framework of
Bandura’s (1977) four sources of self-efﬁcacy (e.g., Betz & Schifano, 2000).
For example, the Skills Conﬁdence Inventory (SCI; Betz, Borgen, & Harmon, 1996) includes self-efﬁcacy measures of the six Holland themes and was
developed as a companion to the Strong Interest Inventory (SII; Harmon,
Hansen, Borgen, & Hammer, 1994; Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume). Betz
and her colleagues also developed the Expanded Skills Conﬁdence Inventory
(ESCI; Betz et al., 2003) to assess more speciﬁc content analogous to the Basic
Interest Scales (e.g., Mathematics, Science, Teaching) of the SII. The ESCI

484

Career Development and Counseling

has been incorporated into the Career and Personality Assessments (CAPA)
system as the Career Conﬁdence Inventory (CCI; Betz & Borgen, 2010) and
now covers 27 speciﬁc dimensions for which self-efﬁcacy can be assessed.
Using a similar format, the Kuder Skills Assessment (KSA; Zytowski,
Rottinghaus, & D’Achiardi, 2007) includes 16 10-item measures, representing content organized by the U.S. Department of Education’s Career
Clusters (e.g., Manufacturing, Marketing). The KSA has separate versions
for adolescents and adults, incorporating appropriate degrees of item difﬁculty. Rottinghaus (2009) reported that scores on the scales of the KSA–
College and Adult version demonstrated high reliability and concurrent
validity by demonstrating that relevant scales (i.e., Finance, Marketing &
Sales, and Business Operations) distinguished between groups of business
majors specializing in accounting, management, ﬁnance, and marketing.
Self-efﬁcacy measures are meant to be used for speciﬁed content domains
(Bandura, 2006a). Therefore, researchers have developed measures for
relevant content domains expressly for speciﬁc populations. For example,
Fouad, Smith, and Enochs (1997) developed the Middle School SelfEfﬁcacy Scale, which includes age-appropriate content and measures of
career decision-making self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, and intentionsgoals. Smith and Fouad (1999) developed a separate series of measures
addressing self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, interests, and goals for
content involving art, social studies, math/science, and English, targeting a
university population.
Practitioners should be aware that nuanced interpretations can be made,
depending on the precise language of the directions and item stems (Betz &
Rottinghaus, 2006). The traditional item format asks clients if they ‘‘can do’’ a
speciﬁc task, based on a scale ranging from 0% to 100%, without comparative
judgments to peers. Most career self-efﬁcacy measures instruct clients to rate
the degree to which they can perform a speciﬁed task using a 5-point
Likert rating scale. However, many related measures use slightly different
formats, which affect the interpretation of clients’ scores. For example,
The Campbell Interest and Skill Survey (CISS; Campbell, Hyne & Nilsen,
1992; Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume) is commonly included within the
literature examining self-efﬁcacy for career-relevant content, although the
item format reﬂects ability self-estimates (e.g., expert, slightly below average
in comparison to one’s peers) versus an individual frame of reference
distinctive of self-efﬁcacy. Brown, Lent, and Gore (2000) found that the two
formats were somewhat distinct, with ability self-estimates measured by peer
comparison instruments (CISS) informing self-efﬁcacy beliefs (perceptions
of what one can do). Nonetheless, both formats seem to be useful in
counseling, and no research to date has suggested that one format yields
more useful information than the other in counseling. Counselors might

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

485

be aware though that ability self-estimates are but one (albeit important)
inﬂuence on self-efﬁcacy beliefs.
Outcome expectations. According to SCCT, an individual’s self-efﬁcacy
beliefs, as well as beliefs about consequences associated with a particular
action, can inﬂuence interest development, goal selection, and actions.
Lent and colleagues (1994) deﬁned outcome expectations as ‘‘personal beliefs
about probable response outcomes’’ (p. 83), essentially what will happen
if I pursue X. For example, Jamie may not pursue a biology major, even
though she has high science self-efﬁcacy, if she does not think a science
major would provide satisfying career options for her. Bandura (1986)
noted that the content of outcomes may be physical, social, or personal.
Outcome expectations, together with self-efﬁcacy beliefs, guide behaviors
(Fouad & Guillen, 2006) by affecting individuals’ approach or avoidance
behaviors and persistence in the face of obstacles. Thus, a person with
strong self-efﬁcacy and positive outcome expectations for a speciﬁc career
pursuit (e.g., science) will be more likely to pursue career-relevant tasks
(e.g., take science courses, select a science major) and persist in the face of
obstacles than those with low self-efﬁcacy beliefs and less positive outcome
expectations. Knowledge of a client’s outcome expectations especially
provides important information to identify why a person with high
self-efﬁcacy in an area may not report strong interest. For example, many
math- and science-talented women may choose not to pursue a science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) career because they
perceive that STEM work environments might not be especially welcoming
to women (see Betz, 1989, for a discussion of the null environment).
Outcome expectations typically are assessed using an adapted version of
Vroom’s (1964) expectancy-value model of work motivation. Such scales
typically ask participants to indicate the degree of importance they place
on various values. Then, for each value, participants are asked to indicate
how likely it would be satisﬁed if they were to take a speciﬁc action
(e.g., pursue a career in engineering). Practitioners then must combine the
importance ratings with the likelihood ratings to yield an overall index of
outcome expectations (see Brooks & Betz, 1990, for a good example of such
a measure).
This two-step process of collecting separate ratings for importance and
likelihood has often been reduced to a single step, essentially asking participants to respond to various statements containing positive outcomes
(e.g., satisfaction with salary) that may result from taking a particular action
(Bieschke, 2000). For example, participants may be asked how satisﬁed they
would be with their salary if they entered the ﬁeld of chemistry. Thus,

486

Career Development and Counseling

different values (e.g., monetary compensation) are implicit in the outcomes.
Participants are asked to rate their agreement that each outcome will occur or
how likely each is to occur, assuming they were to take the action or achieve
a designated level of performance. Gore and Leuwerke (2000) introduced a
variation of the single-step process in which participants essentially generate
their own personal weighting scheme. Participants are presented with a list
of various work values and asked to rate the degree to which they would
fulﬁll those most important to them, given the selection of various careers.
There are a variety of other formats that counselors can use when working
with clients. For example, Lent and Brown (2006) suggest asking how likely
each of a variety of outcomes are for different career ﬁelds, ranging from
highly unlikely to highly likely. Alternatively, one may ask the extent to which
favored outcomes would be available (not very much to very much; e.g., Gore &
Leuwerke, 2000). Regardless of format, the basic goal of outcome expectations
assessment is to gather data on the types of outcomes clients expect from
different career or educational pursuits. These data can then be used to
gather occupational information to ascertain the accuracy of these outcome
expectations. For example, a client may drastically underestimate the income
potential from a speciﬁc occupational pursuit for which he or she has high
self-efﬁcacy beliefs (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
Recent research has focused on positive outcome expectations (or afﬁrmatively worded values); however, it is also important to assess negative
outcome expectations (Fouad & Guillen, 2006; Lent & Brown, 2006). Counselors can assess for negative consequences that clients are expecting, such as
discrimination, loneliness, social disapproval, and work–family conﬂict, that
may then help explain their avoidance of certain career options. For example,
a client may avoid a career that seems gender-typed for the opposite sex
(e.g., a male avoiding a career in cosmetology).
Goals. Personal goals reﬂect individuals’ plans to engage in a particular
task or achieve a certain outcome. SCCT incorporates two primary forms
of personal goals: choice content goals and performance goals (Lent &
Brown, 2006). Choice content goals refer to what sort of activities one hopes
to pursue, whereas performance goals refer to the degree and quality of
achievement one hopes to demonstrate in a given domain. Choice content
goals function to motivate individuals to pursue preferred options in their
educational or vocational ﬁeld (Lent et al., 2003), whereas performance goals
reﬂect the level of success individuals hope to attain for a given task (Phillips
& Gully, 1997).
The assessment of goals tends to be relatively straightforward. In social
cognitive career studies, choice goals are usually assessed by asking

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

487

participants to indicate their intent to select or perform a particular activity
(e.g., choosing a college major). Participants are typically asked to rate their
likelihood of selecting or persisting in a particular the activity. For example,
Lent and Brown (2006) suggest presenting a set of aspirational statements,
such as ‘‘I intend to take a math course next semester,’’ to which participants
respond by rating their level of agreement, ranging from strongly disagree
to strongly agree. Choice goals often help provide a prediction of eventual
actions, particularly if goals are stated clearly, are set proximally to the
behavior, and refer to actions that are within the individuals’ control (Ajzen,
1988). In an assessment of performance goals, instead of the counselor
asking about intent to select or persist at the activity, a participant indicates
how well he or she intends to perform the activity. For example, clients
may indicate the productivity level they plan to attain in a given work
environment (Locke & Latham, 1990).
Social Roles and Relational Patterns
Although many believe that vocational psychology has focused entirely on
the individual perspective (Richardson, 2012), there are now a variety of
theoretical models that explicitly consider the role of social and contextual
issues in career development (e.g., Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994, 2000; Lent,
Chapter 5, this volume). Lent (2012) asserted that foundational vocational
psychology theories have always incorporated attention to work issues
within the context of multiple life roles (Super et al., 1996) and have inherently attended to the contextual factors. For example, person–environment
ﬁt models (e.g., Dawis, 2005; Holland, 1997) emphasized the inﬂuence of
factors within educational and work environments. However, changes in
society and the workplace are driving renewed emphasis on relational
factors in career development (Blustein, 2001, 2011; Richardson, 2012;
Schultheiss, 2003), including work–family interface, role salience, and
support (see Heppner, Chapter 7, and Kenny & Medvide, Chapter 12,
this volume). We next brieﬂy examine the importance of life role salience
and supports.
Life role salience. Today, men and women often hold commitments at both
home (e.g., parental, housework) and the workplace, and it can be difﬁcult
to balance the various roles associated with those commitments. Various
terms, such as role scarcity, resource drain, conﬂict, and negative spillover (see
Edwards & Rothbard, 2000, for an overview), have been used to describe the
limited and ﬁxed amounts of resources for each role (e.g., time and energy)
that one may experience. Managing multiple roles between home and work

488

Career Development and Counseling

can be problematic because they draw on the same scarce resources. It is
particularly important in counseling to ascertain how salient the work role
is for the client vis-à-vis other life roles and to incorporate this information
when considering the desirability and feasibility of different career pursuits.
Role salience assessment also provides useful information in working with
clients experiencing dissatisfaction with their current jobs. For example, a
client may experience job dissatisfaction because the job interferes with the
pursuit of other roles (e.g., parent, spouse, leisurite) that are more important
(salient) to the client.
The Salience Inventory (SI; Neville & Super, 1986) is a 170-item self-report
instrument that measures three different salience variables (i.e., participation,
commitment, and value expectations) assessed across ﬁve life roles (i.e.,
study, work, community service, home, and leisure activities). Participation
items assess amount of time and energy a client has invested in each of
the life roles. Commitment items inquire about the respondents’ emotional
attachment toward the ﬁve life roles, and the value expectations items address
the likelihood of clients having opportunities to express their values in a
given role. Assessing life-role salience early in the career counseling process
can provide the counselor with information about the client’s readiness to
explore his or her interests, abilities, and values (Nevill & Calvert, 1996).
Nevill and Calvert speciﬁcally suggested using the SI to gather information
about the importance the client places on work in comparison to other roles.
Assessing for the client’s degree of involvement in work and home life roles,
and possible conﬂicts between them, can inform counseling objectives. For
example, if a client perceives the worker role as unimportant, then the client
may have little motivation to explore career options. For these clients, Nevill
and Calvert suggest using interventions that enhance the client’s awareness
and interest in various career ﬁelds (e.g., job shadowing, relevant readings).
When examining the relative ranking of salience across various roles, it is
important to explore how societal expectations (e.g., gender, culture) may
affect clients’ perceptions of career and lifestyle concerns.
Supports. Identifying and engaging various support systems can help clients
overcome challenges, thereby enhancing career development. From the
perspective of SCCT, supports are considered ‘‘environmental variables
that can facilitate the formation and pursuit of individuals’ career choices’’
(Lent et al., 2000, p. 42). In line with the counseling profession’s focus on
client strengths, it is essential to assess not only barriers that one may face
in the career development process but also variables that may facilitate
the process as well. Two measures that can be helpful in assessing clients’
levels of support around career development concerns are the Social Support

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

489

Behaviors (SS-B) measure (Vaux, Riedel, & Stewart, 1987) and the Support
scale from the Career Futures Inventory–Revised (Rottinghaus et al., 2012).
The SS-B emphasizes ﬁve modes of social support (i.e., emotional support,
socializing, practical assistance, ﬁnancial assistance, and advice/guidance)
from speciﬁc individuals for respondents facing a particular stressor. The
Support scale of the CFI-R identiﬁes clients’ perceptions of emotional and
instrumental support from others in their life related to pursuing career
goals. These measures can be used to help a client recognize speciﬁc sources
of support (e.g., mentors, family members) in his or her life and identify
potential needs to enhance weak support systems. Clients may beneﬁt
from a discussion of how to build professional networks and use existing
formal resources in the community settings (e.g., career services, alumni).
Regardless, it is important for clients to recognize how to foster relationships
and ask for help when necessary.
This section presented an overview of various career constructs derived
from prominent career development theories, including career maturity,
career adaptability, self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, goals, role salience,
and social supports. Attending to these aspects of the career decision-making
process can supplement information gathered through the assessment of the
Big Three (interests, needs/values, and abilities). In the next section, we
examine several important factors that are used in career counseling that
traditionally have not been linked to speciﬁc career development theories.
ADDITIONAL FACTORS RELEVANT TO CAREER DEVELOPMENT
An integrative and comprehensive approach to assessment requires attention to additional factors that may inﬂuence career decisions. For example,
personality assessment can provide information regarding how clients generally think, feel, and respond to situations within various occupational
and social settings. In addition, this section summarizes career decisionmaking difﬁculties, including various sources of indecision and barriers that
potentially hinder career development.
Assessment of Personality
Personality traits reﬂect a relatively enduring set of tendencies or overall
styles of thinking and feeling and are often represented by the Big Five
traits of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness,
and Conscientiousness (Digman, 1990). As discussed by Brown and Hirschi
(Chapter 11, this volume), personality traits are related to vocational interests;
choice of occupations; conﬁdence in performing tasks; work performance,
satisfaction, and tenure; and even how clients approach the process of

490

Career Development and Counseling

learning. Personality traits also relate to how people conduct job searches
and how they respond to different forms of counseling.
Although Holland (1997) considered his six RIASEC types as constituting
vocational personality dimensions, and meta-analyses have demonstrated
substantial shared variance between the Big Five personality traits and
Holland’s vocational interest types (Larson, Rottinghaus, & Borgen,
2002), these two sets of constructs are largely empirically distinct. Practitioners commonly assess the Big Five personality traits through such
measures as the NEO Personality Inventory–Revised (NEO PI-R; Costa &
McCrae, 1992) and its variants (see later). The Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator–3rd Edition (MBTI; Myers, McCaulley, Quenk, & Hammer, 1998)
is also often used in career counseling to assess other dimensions of personality. In addition, the personal style scales of the Strong Interest Inventory
(Donnay, Morris, Schaubhut, & Thompson, 2005) can provide useful insights
into clients’ typical ways of interacting with the world related to career
choice and development. Additional personality measures that are used less
frequently by career practitioners include the 16 PF–5th Edition (Cattell,
Cattell, & Cattell, 1993) and California Psychological Inventory (Gough &
Bradley, 1996).
NEO Personality Inventory–Revised (NEO PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992). The
240-item NEO PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 1992) is the most widely researched
measure of the Big Five personality factors, and it includes six more speciﬁc
facets within each general factor (e.g., Warmth and Assertiveness are two
of the facets of Extraversion). Several versions of the NEO are available,
including the NEO-FFI, a 60-item measure assessing the Big Five only (i.e.,
it does not provide facet measures), and the NEO-4, which was developed
expressly for career counseling applications and excludes the Neuroticism
factor. Widely used public domain measures of the Big Five and numerous
speciﬁc personality constructs (including constructs assessed in the NEO
PI-R, CPI, 16PF) are available from Goldberg’s (1999) International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) collaboratory. A signiﬁcant amount of the career-related
research using the Big Five has focused on connections with Holland interest types, yielding points of convergence between Extraversion and Social
and Enterprising interests, Openness to Experience and Investigative and
Artistic interests, and Agreeableness and Social interests (Larson et al., 2002).
Additional research on the Big Five supports their wide application to career
counseling and industrial-organizational settings, especially regarding job
performance and satisfaction (see Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11; Lent &
Brown, Chapter 22, this volume; Walsh & Eggerth, 2005). A series of metaanalytic investigations have concluded that Conscientiousness signiﬁcantly

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

491

relates to job performance across all occupations (cf. Barrick & Mount, 1991),
whereas Emotional Stability and Extraversion also show signiﬁcant, yet
smaller effects (Tett, Jackson, & Rothstein, 1991). A similar meta-analysis
by Judge, Heller, and Mount (2002) reported signiﬁcant mean correlations
between job satisfaction and the following Big Five traits: Emotional Stability (.29), Conscientiousness (.26), and Extraversion (.25). It is important to
note that relationships involving Conscientiousness may differ, depending
on the type of occupation (scientiﬁc versus artistic), and speciﬁc facets of
Conscientiousness (e.g., dependability, achievement) may be more useful
than other facets (e.g., organization) (Mount, Barrick, & Stewart, 1998; Tett
et al., 1991). Thus, assessing the Big Five via one of the versions of the
NEO personality inventories may yield valuable information about clients
who are currently experiencing dissatisfaction or poor performance at work,
as well as those who are having difﬁculty in the job search process. High
Neuroticism (and perhaps low Conscientiousness) may contribute to clients’
feelings of dissatisfaction at work; low Conscientiousness (and some of its
facets) may contribute to performance and job-ﬁnding problems. Personality information can also be incorporated with RIASEC information to help
clients make more fully informed career choices.
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator–3rd edition (MBTI; Myers et al., 1998). Unlike
the atheoretical empirical approach used in developing measures based on
the Big Five, the MBTI was derived from Carl Jung’s personality types by
Isabel Briggs Myers and Katherine Cook Briggs. The MBTI is commonly
used in organizational and career counseling settings to facilitate clients’
understanding of their natural tendencies across the following four areas:
(1) Extraversion versus Introversion (the focus of one’s energy), (2) Sensing
versus Intuition (how one gathers information), (3) Thinking versus Feeling (how one makes decisions), and (4) Judging versus Perceiving (how
one plans and deals with the outer world). Based on the highest scores
within each dichotomy, combinations across these four dichotomies yield a
four-letter MBTI type (e.g., ENFP, ISTJ) that can aid team building within
organizations and inform clients about how their tendencies may relate
to academic and career decisions. Although numerous guidebooks (e.g.,
Kirby & Barger, 2011) are available to support interpretations of results
based on one of 16 resulting types, a relatively small literature has examined the utility of the MBTI in counseling settings and yielded inconclusive
results regarding its effectiveness for the stated purposes. However, the
MBTI Career Report (Hammer, 2009) does link MBTI types with occupational groups based on the preferred tasks and work environments of
satisﬁed incumbents.

492

Career Development and Counseling

Personal Style Scales. The ﬁve Personal Style Scales (PSS) of the Strong Interest
Inventory (SII; Donnay et al., 2005; Hansen, Chapter 14, this volume) include
Work Style, Learning Environment, Leadership Style, Risk Taking, and Team
Orientation. As the newest set of scales in the SII, PSSs reﬂect distinctive
personality features addressing how individuals approach learning, work,
and leisure.
The Work Style scale distinguishes individuals who prefer to work with
people versus ideas, data, or things. The Learning Environment scale identiﬁes those who prefer hands-on, practical, or applied learning settings versus
academic settings that emphasize conceptual ideas, including cultural and
scientiﬁc content. The Leadership Style scale measures the degree to which
people prefer leading by directing others versus leading by example. The
Risk Taking scale distinguishes people who are comfortable taking chances
in physical, ﬁnancial, or general settings versus those who would rather play
it safe. Introduced in 2005, the Team Orientation scale distinguishes those
who prefer engaging in team-based versus individual activities.
These relatively new scales have generated a growing body of research
demonstrating their utility in career-related applications. For example, the
PSSs collectively predict college major and occupational choices above and
beyond Holland themes (Donnay & Borgen, 1999; Lindley & Borgen, 2000).
The Learning Environment scale predicts educational aspiration level among
undergraduate students (Rottinghaus, Lindley, Green, & Borgen, 2002). Hees
(2010) found that different PSS scales added signiﬁcant unique variance in the
prediction of work satisfaction beyond Holland RIASEC scales for different
occupations. For example, higher Teamwork Orientation scores signiﬁcantly
distinguished satisﬁed from dissatisﬁed workers in ﬁve of the eight occupational samples, including engineering manager, computer support specialist,
lawyer, elementary school teacher, and administrative assistant, suggesting
that satisﬁed employees in these occupations value working in teams. Similarly, satisﬁed engineering managers and lawyers seemed to value taking
on direct leadership responsibilities more than those who were less satisﬁed
in these ﬁelds. Overall, the PSSs appear to complement the interest results
on the SII. For example, the Learning Environment scale might provide
additional useful information for clients trying to decide among occupations
requiring different amounts of education. Persons scoring low on this scale
(suggesting a preference for hands-on versus academic settings) may opt
for interesting occupations requiring less formal education than others. At
the very least, scores on this scale may provide clients with information
about their likely comfort if they decide to pursue occupations requiring
substantial academic education.
This section presented a brief overview of prominent personality measures
used in career counseling settings. Career counselors traditionally embrace

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

493

a normal view of personality and strengths instead of pathological features.
Although personality assessment has not been emphasized in career settings as much as other individual differences (e.g., interests, abilities), their
potential value is suggested by research examining the Big Five dimensions
related to vocational interests, work performance, career satisfaction, and
the job search process among other career outcomes (See Brown & Hirschi,
Chapter 11, this volume). In addition to the Big Five, it may be useful to
assess speciﬁc facets of the Big Five, as well as the Personal Style Scales on
the SII and tendencies reﬂected in the MBTI.
Career Decision-Making Difﬁculties
The processes involved in constructing a clear vocational identity are crucial
precursors to implementing appropriate career plans. Throughout their
careers, individuals must thoughtfully engage in career exploration tasks
and overcome numerous barriers that can be external (e.g., disability, racism,
poor economy) or internal (e.g., lack of conﬁdence, negative outlook). The
literature on career decision-making difﬁculties can inform practitioners in
helping their clients navigate the challenges of making career decisions. Next,
we summarize crucial information about career decision-making difﬁculties.
Career decision-making is a complex process, by which clients are required
to process information about themselves and the world of work. Difﬁculties
in making decisions could occur if clients do not possess relevant information, have conﬂicting information, or do not know how to process the
information (Gati, 1986). Difﬁculties could also arise when the psychological characteristics of the individual interfere with decision-making tasks
(Crites, 1969). There are several approaches to measuring career indecision,
including My Vocational Situation (Holland, Daiger, & Power, 1980), the
Career Decision Difﬁculties Questionnaire (CDDQ; Gati, Krausz, & Osipow,
1996), and the Emotional and Personality Related Career Decision-Making
Difﬁculties questionnaire (EPCD; Saka, Gati, & Kelly, 2008).
Sources of indecision. Gati and his colleagues developed two systems to identify underlying sources of indecision. The ﬁrst system is based on a decision
theory approach (Gati et al., 1996) and distinguishes between difﬁculties that
may arise prior to decision making (i.e., lack of readiness due to low motivation, general indecisiveness, dysfunctional beliefs) and those that occur
as a person is deciding (i.e., lack of information about the process, self, and
occupations; inconsistent information due to unreliable information). The
second system suggests that personality and emotional factors interfere with
career decision-making in three different ways: (1) pessimistic views about
the process of decision making, the world of work, and personal control;

494

Career Development and Counseling

(2) anxiety about the process, uncertainty, choice making, and outcomes;
and (3) self and identity factors related to generalized anxiety, self-esteem,
and interpersonal conﬂicts. Both systems have yielded a measure that can
be used in research and career counseling (Amir, Gati, & Kleiman, 2008;
Gati et al., 1996).
More recently, Brown and colleagues (2012) showed empirically that a
variety of internal (self-esteem, neuroticism, trait anxiety) and contextual
(e.g., external barriers and external conﬂicts) variables that had been found
in prior research to be related to career indecision intercorrelated in such a
way to suggest four major sources of career indecision difﬁculties. Brown
and colleagues (2012) labeled these factors (1) neuroticism/negative affectivity (i.e., persons scoring high on this factor may have chronic problems
with decision making because they tend to focus on the negative aspects
of different options and to be relatively dissatisﬁed with available options),
(2) choice/commitment anxiety (i.e., persons scoring high on this factor may
perceive a number of acceptable options but feel unable to commit), (3) lack
of readiness (i.e., persons scoring high on this factor may lack planfulness
and goal directedness and demonstrate low career decision-making selfefﬁcacy beliefs), and (4) interpersonal conﬂicts. Hacker, Carr, Abrams, and
Brown (in press) developed and evaluated the 65-item Career Indecision
Proﬁle (CIP) to measure each of these sources of career indecision. Although
the research on the CIP is not as extensive as research on the two measures
derived from the Gati and colleagues model, these measures have the goal
of helping counselors more speciﬁcally target their counseling efforts to the
sources of their clients’ difﬁculties. For example, a high score on one of these
measure’s interpersonal conﬂicts scales suggests that identifying and managing this source of conﬂict should be a primary focus of counseling. Similarly,
clients scoring high on the chronic indecisiveness, neuroticism/negative
affectivity, or choice/commitment anxiety scales may need more intensive
counseling than those scoring lower on these scales. As counselors work
with their clients toward developing their vocational self-concepts and overcoming career decision-making difﬁculties, it is also important to consider
cultural and contextual factors that may be inﬂuencing these processes.
Barriers. Counselors need to understand factors that may interfere with
their clients’ career development process to help them overcome various
obstacles. One such factor is the perception of barriers that hinder an
individual’s ability to make and implement career choices. Swanson and
Woitke (1997) deﬁned career barriers as ‘‘events or conditions, either within
the person or in his or her environment, that make career progress difﬁcult’’
(p. 434). Accordingly, barriers may originate from intrapersonal (e.g., lack

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

495

of conﬁdence) or environmental (e.g., weak job market) sources and are
modiﬁable to varying degrees. Lent, Brown, and Hackett’s (1994, 2000) SCCT
is a useful model for examining contextual features, such as barriers and
supports, that affect career development. Counselors may facilitate clients’
exploration of these barriers by reﬂecting on their own skills (e.g., ‘‘Do
I have the capability to succeed as an engineer?’’), their perceptions of various
academic or work environments (e.g., ‘‘If I pursue this nontraditional career,
will I experience discrimination?’’), or their perceptions of the resources
that they have available to them (e.g., ‘‘Can I ﬁnancially afford to pursue
this option?’’). Barriers can also be explored by using one of the following
barriers measures.
Swanson and Tokar (1991) developed the Career Barriers Inventory (CBI),
a self-report measure designed to assess a wide range of barriers that
individuals may face throughout the career development process (e.g.,
career choice, job performance, work–family interface). The Career Barriers
Inventory–Revised (CBI-R; Swanson, Daniels, & Tokar, 1996) is a 70-item
instrument scored on 13 scales that broadly cover several dimensions of
barriers, including sex discrimination, lack of conﬁdence, multiple-role conﬂict, conﬂict between children and career demands, racial discrimination,
inadequate preparation, disapproval by signiﬁcant others, decision-making
difﬁculties, dissatisfaction with career, discouragement from choosing nontraditional careers, disability/health concerns, job market constraints, and
difﬁculties with networking/socialization. The CBI-R can be used to gather
information about the client’s awareness of current barriers or those that
may arise in the future. Once barriers have been identiﬁed, the counselor
and client can then work collaboratively to garner resources and support
to overcome or cope with these concerns. For example, a client facing a
mid-career transition can explore ways to plan for the demands of changing
job requirements (and afﬁliated skills) and potential health concerns and role
conﬂicts that may limit future employability.
Another commonly used measure of barriers is the Perceptions of Barriers
Scale (POB; McWhirter, 1997). The POB is a 24-item scale that measures
barriers related to ethnic and gender discrimination, obstacles in the pursuit
of postsecondary education, overall perception of barriers, and conﬁdence
level in overcoming them (McWhirter, Hackett, & Bandalos, 1998). One
advantage of this measure is the inclusion of a conﬁdence scale that
can be used to assess clients’ feelings of self-efﬁcacy about overcoming
identiﬁed barriers. For clients with low barrier-coping self-efﬁcacy beliefs,
counselors and clients can work toward enhancing clients’ coping efﬁcacy beliefs to overcome these structural and personal barriers by using
skill-building interventions (Hackett & Byars, 1996). In addition to interventions aimed at modifying Bandura’s (1977) four sources of self-efﬁcacy

496

Career Development and Counseling

(i.e., performance accomplishments, modeling, emotional arousal, verbal
persuasion), this process can include identifying past situations in which
clients have successfully overcome obstacles. Other strategies that have
been proposed to help the client prepare for potential barriers include
Brown and Lent’s (1996) suggestion of having clients list the potential
gains and losses associated with speciﬁed goals and develop methods to
cope with or overcome identiﬁed losses (i.e., barriers; see Lent, Chapter 5,
this volume).
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
Throughout the history of the career counseling profession, assessment
efforts have emphasized the traditional constructs of interests, needs/values,
and abilities. However, various additional constructs that we have discussed
in this chapter are also relevant to a comprehensive approach to career
counseling. We have focused on speciﬁc measures and assessment strategies
that have received empirical support and that offer insights for their use
in career counseling practice. Next, we provide take-home messages to
practitioners that give an overview of how and when these assessment
procedures are commonly used. In this ﬁnal section, we seek to guide
practitioners in their pursuit of effective assessment decisions.
In relation to Super’s theory of career development, career maturity has
been considered to be a particularly important variable to assess during career exploration with adolescents. Adolescents frequently encounter
important decisions that can affect their developmental and career trajectories. When faced with these decisions, many adolescents fail to consider
and integrate their interests, skills, and abilities and thus ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to progress toward a speciﬁc career goal. Assessing the barriers that have
hindered adolescents’ development and helping them establish strategies to
overcome barriers may be an important initial goal in career counseling with
adolescents. Career salience is often assessed with clients who are ﬁnding
it difﬁcult to commit to tentative career choices or who are struggling to
balance the dual roles of both family and work.
Holland’s theory encourages us to consider clients’ vocational identities.
Assessing vocational identity informs practitioners of the degree to which
their clients’ perceptions of their goals, interests, and abilities are clear and
realistic. Essentially, assessing vocational identity serves as a needs assessment to help identify interventions that may optimize the counseling process.
For example, career counseling and providing career information to clients
has been shown to increase the level of vocational identity (Schmidt & Callan,
1992). In turn, higher levels of vocational identity have been associated with
more congruent college major choices, planning about preferred occupations,

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

497

and forming success-creating work attitudes (Wallace-Broscious, Seraﬁca, &
Osipow, 1994).
In relation to social cognitive career theory, self-efﬁcacy, outcome expectations, goals, supports, and barriers can all be helpful constructs to assess
in career counseling. SCCT speciﬁcally suggests that many people may
eliminate potentially satisfying career options prematurely because of unrealistically low self-efﬁcacy beliefs or inaccurate outcome expectations. Thus,
an exploration of clients’ self-efﬁcacy beliefs and outcome expectations may
allow them to reconsider occupations they previously eliminated. SCCT also
outlines how contextual factors may impede (e.g., barriers) or facilitate (e.g.,
supports) clients’ abilities to translate interests into satisfying occupational
decisions. Thus, assessing the barriers and supports that clients may perceive for different career options may be crucial aspects of counseling by
broadening options for clients and minimizing impediments to choice.
Personality assessment, although not as commonly used in career counseling, undoubtedly serves a purpose by providing information helpful
for conceptualization, treatment planning, and building the therapeutic
alliance. In conjunction with other types of assessments, such as an interest assessment, information about a client’s personality can help enhance
the information yielded by traditional career assessments. Similar to other
assessments, the process of interpreting the results of a personality assessment facilitates discussion with the client and stimulates self-reﬂection that
informs career choice and adjustment decisions. Personality is also related
to work satisfaction and performance (see Lent and Brown, Chapter 22, this
volume) and to job search success (see Jome & Phillips, Chapter 21, this
volume). Thus, personality assessment can provide valuable information
for working with persons seeking counseling for help in increasing work
satisfaction, work performance, or job search success.
Assessing how clients approach the process of career decision-making is
necessary because not all clients are similarly skilled at, or conﬁdent about,
making a career choice, even after exploring their interests, skills/abilities,
and values. Although making a career or educational choice is not always
the ideal outcome of career counseling, counselors need to attend to personal
concerns and other factors that may limit effective decision-making in clients.
Counseling interventions may then be employed to assist clients to develop
the conﬁdence, skills, coping strategies, and information necessary to make
career choices both now and in the future. Assessment of clients’ problems
in choice-making via the inventories we discussed in this chapter can also
be used to tailor their counseling efforts. For example, clients with longstanding problems in decision-making (i.e., chronically indecisive clients)
will probably require a different, more intensive type of counseling than
clients who simply need additional information to clarify a potential career

498

Career Development and Counseling

choice. Similarly, clients experiencing interpersonal conﬂicts with signiﬁcant
others about their choices may need help only in managing this conﬂict.
Vocational psychologists have examined cultural and contextual aspects
related to career behavior (Bingham & Ward, 1994; Fouad & Kantamneni, 2008; Lent et al., 2000). We believe that the career adaptations
discussed previously in this chapter are clearly contoured by the culture
and the social ecology of everyday life (i.e., one’s situations, role demands,
developmental tasks, and challenges). Culturally sensitive counselors avoid
inappropriate assessment strategies (Fouad & Bingham, 1995) by considering
detailed connections between culture, relationships, and work when assessing career constructs.
It is critical for counselors to be guided by a framework that enhances
understanding of the reciprocal inﬂuences of context on individuals’ career
decisions. Fouad and Kantamneni (2008) deﬁned context as the ‘‘interrelated,
reciprocal, and dynamic environment in which career decisions are made’’
(p. 408). Their model incorporates two levels of contextual inﬂuences: group
level factors (e.g., gender, race and ethnicity, social class, family, religion,
sexual orientation, and relationships) and societal factors (e.g., acculturation, inﬂuences from majority culture). These different factors intersect and
include a third dimension that considers individual differences (e.g., interests, abilities) to help shape career decisions. Thus, counselors must consider
aspects of clients’ culture (e.g., values, barriers, and supports), as well as
inﬂuences from mainstream culture (e.g., schooling, media inﬂuences).
It is important to emphasize that several of the constructs and associated
measures cited in this chapter have been normed and developed with
European Americans and therefore may not always align with minority
group individuals’ worldviews, career decision-making processes, and other
inﬂuential factors in career counseling. In conducting career counseling
assessments with culturally different clients, counselors should consider the
value that each client places on these traditionally assessed constructs and
take into account the relevance of each variable in the context of his or her
cultural background. Moreover, by assessing for cultural aspects that are
relevant to each client, this process should facilitate building a therapeutic
alliance and ideally allow clients to develop positive attitudes toward career
counseling.
Navigating the process of career choice and development is complex and
multifaceted. Today’s clients must routinely take stock of who they are
and be ready to deploy adaptability skills and knowledge in response to
changing circumstances. The assessment process should be done collaboratively with clients by combining multiple sources of information. In addition
to the traditional focus on the big three assessment constructs—interests,
abilities, and needs/values—speciﬁcally examined in earlier chapters, we

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

499

elaborated on process variables. Indeed, knowledge of self and the world
of work are necessary but not sufﬁcient for achieving successful outcomes. Career adaptability begins to ﬁll in the gaps by emphasizing the
process of coping with career development tasks (Savickas, 1997, 2005).
Attending to this critical aspect of career development brings necessary
focus on more ﬂuid constructs that can extend the career development
literature to meet contemporary challenges. We agree with van Vianen,
De Pater, and Preenan (2009), who noted that ‘‘career adaptability rather
than decision making should become the focal concept of career theory and
practice’’ (p. 307).
Ongoing theoretical and empirical work addressing career adaptability will aid work with clients attempting to overcome the demands of
managing careers. Career-related agency, self-efﬁcacy, and other theorydriven constructs addressed herein are important components of adaptive
career decision-making. Ultimately, reﬂection of integrative career assessment within a cultural context can aid clients in making adaptive decisions
that will increase their employability and support the development of a
clear and integrated vocational identity that informs the construction of their
career story.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, P. L., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests:
Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 219–245.
Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality, and behavior. Stony Stratford, UK: Open University Press.
Amir, T., Gati, I., & Kleiman, T. (2008). Understanding career decision-making
difﬁculties. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 281–309.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efﬁcacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84, 191–215. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.191
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review
of Psychology, 52, 1–26.
Bandura, A. (2006a). Guide for constructing self-efﬁcacy scales. In F. Pajares &
T. C. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efﬁcacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 307–337). Charlotte, NC:
Information Age.
Bandura, A. (2006b). Toward a psychology of human agency. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1, 164–180. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2006.00011.x
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The big ﬁve personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1–26.
Betz, N. E. (1989). Implications of the null environment hypothesis for women’s
career development and for counseling psychology. Counseling Psychologist, 17,
136–144. doi:10.1177/0011000089171008

500

Career Development and Counseling

Betz, N. E., & Borgen, F. H. (2010). The CAPA integrative online system for
college major exploration. Journal of Career Assessment, 18, 317–327. doi:10.1177
/1069072710374492
Betz, N. E., Borgen, F. H., & Harmon, L. W. (1996). Skills Conﬁdence Inventory
applications and technical guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Betz, N. E., Borgen, F. H., Rottinghaus, P. J., Paulsen, A., Halper, C., & Harmon, L. W.
(2003). The Expanded Skills Conﬁdence Inventory: Measuring basic dimensions
of vocational activity. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 76–100.
Betz, N. E., & Hackett, G. (1981). The relationship of career-related self-efﬁcacy
expectations to perceived career options in college women and men. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 28, 399–410.
Betz, N. E., & Rottinghaus, P. J. (2006). Current research on parallel measures of
interests and conﬁdence for basic dimensions of vocational activity. Journal of
Career Assessment, 14, 56–76.
Betz, N. E., & Schifano, R. (2000). Evaluation of an intervention to increase Realistic
self-efﬁcacy and interests in college students. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56,
35–52. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1999.1690
Betz, N. E., & Taylor, K. M. (2001). Manual for the Career Decision Self-Efﬁcacy Scale
and CDMSE–Short Form. Columbus: Ohio State University.
Bieschke, K. J. (2000). Factor structure of the Research Outcome Expectations Scale.
Journal of Career Assessment, 8, 303–313.
Bingham, R. P., & Ward, C. M. (1994). Career counseling with ethnic minority women.
In W. B. Walsh & S. Osipow (Eds.), Career counseling with women (pp. 165–195).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L. (2001). The interface of work and relationships: A critical knowledge
base for 21st century psychology. Counseling Psychologist, 29, 179–192.
Blustein, D. L. (2011). A relational theory of working. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
79, 1–17. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2010.10.004
Brooks, L., & Betz, N. E. (1990). Utility of expectancy theory in predicting occupational choices in college students. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 37, 57–64.
Brown, S. D., Hacker, J., Abrams, M., Carr, A., Rector, C., Lamp, K., Siena, A. (2012).
Validation of a four-factor model of career indecision. Journal of Career Assessment,
20, 3–21. doi:10.1177/1069072711417154
Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 354–366.
Brown, S. D., Lent, R. W., & Gore, P. A. (2000). Self-rated abilities and selfefﬁcacy beliefs: Are the empirically distinct? Journal of Career Assessment, 8,
223–235.
Campbell, D. P., Hyne, S. A., & Nilsen, D. L. (1992). Manual for the Campbell Interest
and Skills Survey: CISS. Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems.
Cattell, R. B., Cattell, K., & Cattell, H. (1993). 16PF Fifth Edition questionnaire.
Champaign, IL: Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). NEO PI-R professional manual. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

501

Creed, P. A., Fallon, T., & Hood, M. (2009). The relationship between career
adaptability, person and situation variables, and career concerns in young adults.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 219–229.
Crites, J. O. (1961). A model for the measurement of vocational maturity. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 8, 255–259.
Crites, J. O. (1969). Vocational psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Crites, J. O. (1973). Theory and research handbook for the Career Maturity Inventory.
Monterey, CA: CTB/McGraw-Hill.
Crites, J. O., & Savickas, M. L. (1996). Revision of the Career Maturity Inventory.
Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 131–138.
Crites, J. O., & Savickas, M. L. (2011). Career Maturity Inventory-Form C. Rootstown,
OH: Vocopher.
Dawis, R. V. (2005). The Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 3–23). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the ﬁve-factor model.
Annual Review of Psychology, 41, 417–440.
Donnay, D. A., & Borgen, F. H. (1999). The incremental validity of vocational
self-efﬁcacy: An examination of interest, self-efﬁcacy, and occupation. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 46, 432–447.
Donnay, D. A. C., Morris, M. A., Schaubhut, N. A., & Thompson, R. C. (2005). Strong
Interest Inventory manual: Research, development, and strategies for interpretation. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists.
Edwards, J. R., & Rothbard, N. P. (2000). Mechanisms linking work and family:
Clarifying the relationship between work and family constructs. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 178–199.
Fouad, N. A., & Bingham, R. P. (1995). Career counseling with racial and ethnic
minorities. In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology
(2nd ed., pp. 331–365). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fouad, N. A., & Guillen, A. (2006). Outcome expectations: Looking to the past
and potential future. Journal of Career Assessment, 14, 130–142. doi:10.1177
/1069072705281370
Fouad, N. A., & Kantamneni, N. (2008). Contextual factors in vocational psychology:
Intersections of individual, group, and societal dimensions. In S. D. Brown & R. W.
Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 408–425). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Fouad, N. A., Smith, P. L., & Enochs, L. (1997). Reliability and validity evidence for
the Middle School Self-Efﬁcacy Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling
and Development, 30, 17–31.
Gati, I. (1986). Making career decisions: A conceptual frame of reference for counseling. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 9, 240–245.
Gati, I., Krausz, M., & Osipow, S. H. (1996). A taxonomy of difﬁculties in career
decision-making. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 510–526. doi:10.1037/0022
-0167.43.4.510

502

Career Development and Counseling

Goldberg, L. R. (1999). A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory
measuring the lower-level facets of several ﬁve-factor models. In I. Mervielde, I.
Deary, F. De Fruyt, & F. Ostendorf (Eds.), Personality psychology in Europe (vol. 7,
pp. 7–28). Tilburg, The Netherlands: Tilburg University Press.
Gore, P. A., & Leuwerke, W. C. (2000). Predicting occupational considerations:
A comparison of self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome expectations, and personenvironment congruence. Journal of Career Assessment, 8, 237–250.
Gough, H. G., & Bradley, P. (1996). CPI Manual (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Hacker, J., Carr, A., Abrams, M., & Brown, S. D. (in press). Development of the
Career Indecision Proﬁle: Factor structure, reliability, and validity. Journal of Career
Assessment.
Hackett, G., & Betz, N. E. (1981). A self-efﬁcacy approach to the career development
of women. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 18, 326–336.
Hackett, G., & Byars, A. M. (1996). Social cognitive theory and development of
African American women. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 322–340.
Hammer, A. L. (2009). MBTI career report user’s guide. Palo Alto, CA: CPP.
Harmon, L. W., Hansen, J. C., Borgen, F. H., & Hammer, A. L. (1994). Strong Interest
Inventory applications and technical guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Hees, C. K. (2010). Personally satisfying: Using personal style scales to enhance the
prediction of career satisfaction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale, IL.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
Holland, J. L., Daiger, D., & Power, P. (1980). My vocational situation. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.
Holland, J. L., & Holland, J. E. (1977). Vocational indecision: More evidence and
speculation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 24, 404–414.
Judge, T. A., Heller, D., & Mount, M. K. (2002). Five-factor model of personality and job satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,
530–541.
Kirby, L. K., & Barger, N. J. (2011). MBTI practitioner’s ﬁeld guide: Activities and
strategies for type learning and engagement. Palo Alto, CA: CPP.
Larson, L. M., Rottinghaus, P. J., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Meta-analyses of Big
Six interests and Big Five personality factors. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61,
217–239.
Lent, R. W. (2012). Work and relationship: Is vocational psychology on the eve of
construction? Counseling Psychologist, 40, 268–278. doi:10.1177/0011000011422824
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2006). On conceptualizing and assessing social cognitive
constructs in career research: A measurement guide. Journal of Career Assessment,
14, 12–35.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career and academic interest, choice, and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 45, 79–122.

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

503

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2000). Contextual supports and barriers
to career choice: A social cognitive analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
36–49.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., Schmidt, J., Brenner, B., Lyons, H., & Treistman, D. (2003).
Relation of contextual supports and barriers to choice behavior in engineering
majors: Test of alternative social cognitive models. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
50, 458–465.
Lindley, L. D., & Borgen, F. H. (2000). Personal style scales of the Strong Interest
Inventory: Linking personality and interests. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 57,
22–41.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McWhirter, E. H. (1997). Perceived barriers to education and career: Ethnic and
gender differences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50, 124–140.
McWhirter, E. H., Hackett, G., & Bandalos, D. I. (1998). A causal model of the
educational plans and career expectations of Mexican American high school girls.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45, 166–181.
Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., & Stewart, G. L. (1998). Five-Factor model of personality
and performance in jobs involving interpersonal interactions. Human Performance,
11, 145–165. doi:10.1080/08959285.1998.9668029
Myers, I. B., McCaulley, M. H., Quenk, N. L., & Hammer, A. L. (1998). Manual for the
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (3rd ed.). Mountain View, CA: CPP.
Nevill, D. D., & Calvert, P. D. (1996). Career assessment and the Salience Inventory.
Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 399–412.
Neville, D., & Super, D. E. (1986). The Salience Inventory: Theory, application and
research. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists, Press, Inc.
Phillips, J. M., & Gully, S. M. (1997). Role of goal orientation, ability, need for
achievement, and locus of control in the self-efﬁcacy and goal-setting process.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 792–802.
Richardson, M. S. (2012). Counseling for work and relationship. Counseling Psychologist, 40, 190–242.
Rottinghaus, P. J. (2009). The Kuder Skills Assessment–College and Adult version:
Development and initial validation in a college business sample. Journal of Career
Assessment, 17, 56–68.
Rottinghaus, P. J., Buelow, K., Matyja, A., & Schneider, M. (2012). The Career Futures
Inventory–Revised: Assessing multiple dimensions of career adaptability. Journal
of Career Assessment, 20, 123–139. doi:10.1177/1069072711420849
Rottinghaus, P. J., Day, S. X., & Borgen, F. H. (2005). The Career Futures Inventory:
A measure of career-related adaptability and optimism. Journal of Career Assessment, 13, 3–24.
Rottinghaus, P. J., Lindley, L., Green, M. A., & Borgen, F. H. (2002). Educational
aspirations: The contribution of personality, self-efﬁcacy, and interests. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 61, 1–19.
Rottinghaus, P. J., & Van Esbroeck, R. (2011). Improving person-environment ﬁt
and self-knowledge. In P. J. Hartung & L. M. Subich (Eds.), Developing self in work

504

Career Development and Counseling

and career: Concepts, cases, and contexts (pp. 35–52). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Saka, N., Gati, I., & Kelly, K. R. (2008). Emotional and personality-related aspects of
career decision-making difﬁculties. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 403–424.
Savickas, M. L. (1997). Career adaptability: An integrative construct for life-span,
life-space theory. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 247–259.
Savickas, M. L. (2005). The theory and practice of career construction. In S. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 42–70). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Savickas, M. L. (2011). Career counseling. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Savickas, M. L., & Hartung, P. J. (1996). The Career Development Inventory in review:
Psychometric and research ﬁndings. Journal of Career Assessment, 4, 171–188.
doi:10.1177/106907279600400204
Savickas, M. L., & Porfeli, E. J. (2011). Revision of the Career Maturity Inventory:
The Adaptability Form. Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 355–374. doi:10.1177
/1069072711409342
Savickas, M. L., & Porfeli, E. J. (2012). The Career-Adapt-Abilities Scale: Construction,
reliability, and measurement equivalence across 13 countries. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 80, 661–673. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2012.01.011
Schmidt, A. M., & Callan, V. J. (1992). Evaluating the effectiveness of a career
intervention. Australian Psychologist, 27, 123–126.
Schultheiss, D. E. (2003). A relational approach to career counseling: Theoretical
integration and practical application. Journal of Counseling & Development, 81,
301–310.
Smith, P., & Fouad, N. (1999). Subject-matter speciﬁcity of self-efﬁcacy, outcome
expectations, interests, and intentions and goals: Implications for the social cognitive model. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 461–471.
Solberg, V. S. (1998). Assessing career search self-efﬁcacy: Construct evidence
and developmental antecedents. Journal of Career Assessment, 6, 181–193.
doi:10.1177/106907279800600205
Super, D. E. (1955). The dimensions and measurement of vocational maturity.
Teachers College Record, 57, 151–163.
Super, D. E., & Kidd, J. M. (1979). Vocational maturity in adulthood: Toward turning
a model into a measure. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 14, 255–270.
Super, D. E., & Knasel, E. G. (1979). Speciﬁcations for a measure of career adaptability
in young adults. Cambridge, UK: National Institute for Career Education and
Counseling.
Super, D. E., & Knasel, E. G. (1981). Career development in adulthood: Some
theoretical problems and a possible solution. British Journal of Guidance and
Counseling, 9, 194–201.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space
approach to careers. In D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development:
Applying contemporary theories to practice (3rd ed., pp. 121–178). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Assessing Additional Constructs Affecting Career Choice and Development

505

Super, D. E., Thompson, A. S., Lindeman, R. H., Jordaan, J. P., & Myers, R. A. (1981).
Career Development Inventory: College form. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Swanson, J. L., & D’Achiardi, C. (2005). Beyond interests, needs/values, and abilities:
Assessing other important career constructs over the life span. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 353–381). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Swanson, J. L., Daniels, K. K., & Tokar, D. M. (1996). Measuring perceptions of
career related barriers: The Career Barriers Inventory. Journal of Career Assessment,
4, 219–244. doi:10.1177/106907279600400207
Swanson, J. L., & Tokar, D. M. (1991). Development and initial validation of the
Career Barriers Inventory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 39, 344–361.
Swanson, J. L., & Woitke, M. B. (1997). Theory into practice in career assessment
for women: Assessment and interventions regarding perceived career barriers.
Journal of Career Assessment, 5(4), 443–462.
Tett, R. P., Jackson, D. N., & Rothstein, M. (1991). Personality measures as predictors
of job performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 703–742.
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1991.tb00696.x
Thompson, A. S., & Lindeman, R. H. (1981). Career Development Inventory: User’s
manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
van Vianen, A. E. M., De Pater, I. E., & Preenan, P. T. Y. (2009). Adaptable careers:
Maximizing less and exploring more. Career Development Quarterly, 57, 298–309.
Vaux, A., Riedel, S., & Stewart, D. (1987). Modes of social support: The social support
behaviors (SS-B) scale. American Journal of Community Psychology, 15, 209–237.
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York, NY: Wiley.
Wallace-Broscious, A., Seraﬁca, F. C., & Osipow, S. H. (1994). Adolescent career
development: Relationships to self-concept and identity status. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 4, 127–149.
Walsh, W. B., & Eggerth, D. E. (2005). Vocational psychology and personality: The
relationship of the ﬁve-factor model to job performance and job satisfaction. In
W. B. Walsh & M. L. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (3rd ed.,
pp. 267–296). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zytowski, D. G., Rottinghaus, P. J., & D’Achiardi, C. (2007). The Kuder Skills Assessment user manual. Adel, IA: National Career Assessment Services.

C H A P T E R 18

The Structure, Sources, and Uses
of Occupational Information
PAUL A. GORE JR., WADE C. LEUWERKE, AND ALEXANDRA R. KELLY

O

CCUPATIONAL INFORMATION HAS BEEN a pillar of vocational and career guidance since the beginning of the 20th century. Parsons (1909) firs
identifie the importance of understanding and evaluating the suitability of occupational alternatives. Unfortunately, his work and that of his
colleagues was limited by the lack of available occupational information. An
Advisory Committee on Education (1938) established under the Roosevelt
administration wrote:

At present, no one can advise young people with any assurance as to the relative
opportunities in the various occupational field to which their abilities may
be suited. The available information is scattered, fragmentary, and frequently
unreliable . . . An occupational outlook service is needed that will provide
a clear description of each of the major occupations or groups of minor
occupations, the kind of life each occupation offers, the character of the
preparation essential to enter it, the numbers employed and the trend of
employment, the numbers of new employees taken on each year, and the
numbers of youth in each year of college or secondary school preparation who
have the intention of entering the occupation, if possible.

Soon after the publication of this report, the Bureau of Labor Statistics was
charged with this responsibility, and it continues to provide most of this
information today.
A review of the professional literature around this same time is replete
with examples of suggestions for developing and distributing occupational
information (Brayfiel & Reed, 1950; Brewer, 1942; Clark & Murtland, 1946;
Hoppock & Spiegler, 1941; Markham, 1943; Rohr & Speer, 1948; Shartle, 1946).
507

508

Career Development and Counseling

Authors described methods for distributing information (Rohr & Speer, 1948)
and its effective use in career counseling (Strang, 1945). Markham (1943)
included the use of occupational information as one of his six facets of vocational guidance, the remaining fiv of which were assessment, counseling,
exploration of training opportunities, placement, and follow-up. Williamson
(1937) described the early development and evaluation of a course for college
freshman that emphasized gathering occupational information in support of
career decision making.
Early authors were also concerned with the quality of occupational
information. For example, Shartle (1946) recommended that individuals
responsible for developing occupational information have a background in
information development techniques and that they be acquainted with the
particular specialties being described. Shartle includes recommendations
for occupational classification industrial classification the development of
information for both military and civilian occupations, development of
occupational information for the disabled, and methods for assessing occupational outlook—all elements that can be found in contemporary sources
of occupational information. Other authors focused on the readability of
occupational information and the extent to which individuals would fin the
information ‘‘interesting.’’ Brayfiel and Reed (1950) assessed the readability
and interest level of 24 published sources of occupational information. They
judged over two-thirds of the published occupational information sources
to be ‘‘dull’’ or only ‘‘mildly interesting’’ and ‘‘very difficult’ to read.
Today, career counselors have access to many sources of occupational
information, including resources published by the U.S. Department of Labor,
private publishers, and companies that aggregate and resell occupational
information. Occupational information is available through print and electronic sources and can be linked to assessment results, opportunities for
training and educational advancement, and local job openings. Unlike our
professional predecessors, we now face issues related to having too many
sources of occupational information. Similar to those predecessors, however,
we are concerned with the quality of the available information, its appropriateness for different client populations, and how to best use occupational
information to the advantage of our students and clients.
This chapter provides an overview of important issues in the use of
occupational information in career education and counseling. To balance
breadth and depth of coverage of this topic, we chose to focus on issues
relevant to professionals working with school-age children and clients in
the early stages of career choice and implementation. Although the sources
of occupational information used for workforce development, employment
transition, and retirement planning may be similar to those described in this
chapter, their uses may differ. Additionally, we chose to limit our review

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

509

of print and electronic sources of occupational information to those that are
mostly widely available to career practitioners today. As such, this chapter
will not include a comprehensive list of available sources of information. The
National Career Development Association and American School Counseling Association Web sites are recommended for readers interested in more
comprehensive lists of available resources. Finally, we restricted our discussion to occupational information. We recognize that gathering career-related
information might involve acquiring information about occupations, jobs,
organizations, and job-search processes, among other topics, but we believe
that a focus on occupational information is consistent with our developmental focus on school-age children and clients in the early stages of career
choice and implementation. Readers interested in these other topics are
referred to Kanfer, Wanberg, and Kantrowitz (2001); Posthuma, Morgeson,
and Campion (2002); Saks (2005); and Zikic and Saks (2009); also see Jome
and Phillips, Chapter 21, this volume.
This chapter begins with an empirical justificatio for the importance
of occupational information. We follow this with a brief discussion of the
occupational classificatio systems used in the major information sources
available today. The sheer number of different occupations and their manifestation across industries necessitates classification and familiarity with
these classificatio systems is necessary for career educators and counselors to use these systems effectively in their work. Next, we present an
overview of some of the most widely available print and electronic sources
of occupational information. We then discuss ethical issues in the use of
career information resources and end by offering practical suggestions for
integrating occupational information systems into career interventions.
RESEARCH ON THE IMPORTANCE AND USE OF
OCCUPATIONAL INFORMATION
The acquisition, evaluation, and use of occupational information play a pivotal role in most career theories (Crites, 1976; Hartung, 1999). Thus, it is not
surprising that occupational information has been the focus of a number of
empirical studies. Career information gathering behavior has been treated as
both a precursor to other career outcomes and as a desirable outcome itself,
and lack of career information has been identifie as a major contributor
to career decision-making difficultie (Gati & Amir, 2010; Gati, Krausz, &
Osipow, 1996). Career information has also been examined using a developmental lens. In this section, we provide a brief overview of recent research
exploring the role of occupational information in career development.
Research focusing on developmental aspects of early childhood and
adolescence illuminate the importance of early and accurate occupational

510

Career Development and Counseling

information (Porfeli, Hartung, & Vondracek, 2008). Research suggests that
very young children learn a great deal about the world of work, although
the accuracy of their information varies (Walls, 2000). For example, children appear to have a better understanding of incomes associated with
occupations than they do the availability of those occupations in the workforce. Moreover, students’ preferences for an occupation are associated (not
always accurately) with perceived prestige and length of preparatory time
(Walls, 2000). Investigators reviewing the primary sources of occupational
information for children and adolescents suggest that media (most notably
television) and the family are dominant sources of occupational knowledge for many young children (Hoffner et al., 2006; McMahon, Carroll, &
Gillies, 2001).
Formal occupational information resources were identifie as salient by
one group of investigators (Patton & McCrindle, 2001), though other finding
suggest that the information available in primary sources of occupational
information may not be what young children want. For example, using large
samples of Australian and South African 11- to 14-year-olds, McMahon and
Watson’s (2005) results suggest that students are most interested in learning
about the life and career implications of various career choices. A very
small minority of students (less than 8%) expressed a desire to understand
elements such as the nature of work or the relationship between interests or
personal characteristics and occupations—information that is highlighted in
many occupational information systems designed for students.
Porfeli and his colleagues (2008) suggest that occupational aspirations in
children are often influence by occupational stereotypes—stereotypes that
could be checked and invalidated using sources of occupational information.
Occupational stereotypes, along with persistent gender-role expectations
and socialization, are often cited as explanations for continued gender
imbalances in careers involving science, technology, engineering, and math
(see Heppner, Chapter 7, this volume).
A recent study by Hirschi (2011) further illustrates the importance of
occupational information in early career development. Hirschi studied the
development of career-choice readiness in a sample of Swiss students over a
2-year period and found that, other than age, occupational information was
the strongest predictor of career choice readiness. Predicting and promoting occupational information-seeking behavior may be a complex process.
Although many career education and counseling interventions promote
information-seeking behavior, recent research suggests that this behavior is
partially a function of deterministic factors, such as family socioeconomic
status and early childhood cognitive development (Jordan & Pope, 2001).
More optimistic finding are offered by Millar and Shevlin (2003), who
report that the primary determinants of occupational information-gathering

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

511

behavior include the extent of past information gathering and attitudes
related to those past experiences. Their finding have clear implications for
school counselors and other career educators and counselors and are echoed
by recent research by Brown and his colleagues (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000;
Brown et al., 2003), described later.
Systems designed to foster occupational information-gathering behavior
may not be as effective as we would like them to be. Using a sample of over
80,000 users from an online computer-assisted career guidance program,
Gore, Bobek, Robbins, and Shayne (2006) identifie three types of users:
focused users, general browsers, and in-depth users. Among high school
users, general browsers made up almost 70% of the sample. General browsers
visited the system an average of 1.3 times, spent approximately 20 total
minutes in the session, and recorded only approximately four page hits in
the occupational information session. In contrast, focused users (making
up approximately 28% of the users) visited the system approximately three
times, spent over an hour total in the system, and recorded 19 page hits in
the occupational information session. The in-depth user is what most school
counselors would like to see more frequently. Unfortunately, this group
made up less than 4% of the high school sample, though it was characterized
by heavy use: over eight sessions on average for a total system use of over
1.5 hours. In-depth users were far more likely to discuss their educational
and career plans with school counselors and parents than were other user
types. Based on results from this study and those of Millar and Shevlin
(2003), it is clear that efforts need to focus on getting students more engaged
in using sources of occupational information.
Perhaps some of the strongest evidence arguing for the use of accurate
and reliable sources of occupational information comes from the work of
Brown and his colleagues (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000; Brown et al., 2003). In
reporting on the results of a meta-analysis of published intervention studies
targeting career-choice clients, Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) identifie fiv
intervention techniques that were most highly and positively associated
with beneficia outcomes. These ‘‘critical ingredients’’ included individualized one-on-one interpretation and feedback of assessment results, modeling,
attention to building support networks, the use of writing assignments, and
the use of career information. Further, their finding suggest that by combining these ingredients, practitioners can obtain almost linear increases
in desirable outcomes. In a follow-up study, Brown and colleagues (2003)
found that simply introducing students and clients to sources of occupational
information is suboptimal. Instead, career educators and counselors should
(a) introduce students or clients to reliable and valid sources of occupational
information, (b) work with students and clients ‘‘in session’’ to make sure
they develop confidenc in their ability to navigate and use the system or

512

Career Development and Counseling

resource effectively, and (c) prescribe specifi information-gathering behavior rather than allowing students and clients to determine which system or
resource elements to explore.
OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS
Occupational information is consumed by a variety of individuals, from children and adolescents to college students, working adults, job analysts, state
and federal government agencies, and companies responsible for packaging
and distributing this information to consumers. Organizational classificatio
systems impose structure on an expansive body of occupational information
and make this information accessible to a range of audiences. In this section,
we discuss four occupational classificatio systems (Standard Occupational
Classificatio System, Holland’s hexagon, the World of Work Map, and the
Minnesota Occupational Classificatio System) frequently used by career
counselors and popular occupational information products.
The Standard Occupational Classification System
First introduced in 1977, the Standard Occupational Classificatio System
(SOC) was developed to unify the language used by U.S. federal and state
employment agencies to communicate about occupations and jobs. The SOC
system classifie occupations based on the nature of the work activities
and on the skills, education, and training requirements for the job. The
system groups occupations at four levels of specificity it currently includes
840 detailed occupations within 23 major groups, 97 minor groups, and
461 broad occupations. By including multiple levels of specificity the SOC
system can be used by agencies or organizations with differing needs or
capabilities with respect to data collection and analysis. A more detailed
description of elements and uses of the SOC can be found in Gore and
Hitch (2005).
The SOC system is also dynamic in that it can accommodate occupational
consolidation as easily as it can respond to the growth and development
of new occupations. In a 2010 revision, a Standard Occupational Classificatio Policy Committee (SOCPC) reviewed existing occupations and
potential additions based on public input and a review of changes in the
economic landscape since the last revision. Ultimately, the SOCPC introduced 24 new detailed occupations, many of them related to health care,
information technology, and renewable energy; refine the definition of
existing SOC occupations based on changes in the nature of the work performed; and combined occupations that had become more similar since the
last revision.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

513

Access to the SOC system has increased significantl with the development of the Occupational Information Network (O*NET), a network of
products, databases, and services designed to enhance the availability and
usability of occupation and workforce information (described in more detail
later). The O*NET includes the characteristics of both occupations and the
people who inhabit those occupations, and it employs the SOC system as
its organizing schema. Because the system clusters occupations that are
similar with respect to the work performed and training required, a user
who enters the SOC system to gather information about the occupation of
Health Educator (21-1091), for example, will have easy access to information
about related occupations such as Community Health Worker (21-1094) and
Rehabilitation Counselor (21-1015). The SOC system is also used to organize
occupations in the Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH; U.S. Department
of Labor, 2010).
Overseas, the International Standard Classificatio of Occupations (ISCO)
system serves a similar purpose, providing a structure for aggregating
survey and census data about occupations across a range of nations and
economies. Developed by the International Labor Organization, a United
Nations agency comprising 183 member countries, the ISCO system groups
occupations based on similarity of the skill level required and nature of
the activities performed. The most recent version, adopted in 2008, clusters
occupations within 10 major groups, 43 submajor groups, 131 minor groups,
and 425 unit groups.
The SOC and ISCO systems represent atheoretical models of occupational
classification with occupations organized based solely on the similarity
of the tasks performed in each. The three models that follow, in contrast,
organize occupations based on specifi theories about the preferences and
motivational factors that drive individuals’ career choice and satisfaction.
Holland’s Hexagon
Nauta (Chapter 3, this volume) provides a comprehensive overview of John
Holland’s theory of career choice (Holland, 1997). Holland believed that most
individuals’ work personalities closely resemble a subset of one or more of
six distinct types. Holland also suggested that these six dimensions could
be used to characterize work environments based on aspects of job function
and organizational structure. A basic premise of Holland’s theory is that
individuals will fin satisfaction to the extent that their work personalities
are congruent with the characteristics of their work environment.
Today, a number of career inventories and resources use Holland’s
typology as their primary organizing schema. The Self-Directed Search
(SDS; Holland, 1987) can assist career counselors in assessing the work

514

Career Development and Counseling

personalities of their clients by providing users with scores on each of
Holland’s six personality dimensions. Several additional career assessment instruments, such as the Strong Interest Inventory (Donnay, Morris,
Schaubhut, & Thompson, 2005), the O*NET Interest Profile (Lewis & Rivkin,
1999), and the Skills Confidenc Inventory (Betz, Borgen, & Harmon, 2005),
provide users with information using Holland’s organizational structure.
A comprehensive list of occupational titles and college majors organized
by Holland types is available in the Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes
(Gottfredson & Holland, 1996). Meanwhile, the O*NET online database
allows users to browse occupations by each of Holland’s six dimensions or
to search occupations based on a two- or three-letter Holland code.
World-of-Work Map
Developed by ACT, the World-of-Work Map (WWM) elaborates on
Holland’s hexagon by adding two bipolar and bisecting work task dimensions (Data/Ideas and Things/People) that seem to underlie Holland’s six
work personality dimensions (Prediger, 1982; Rounds, 1995). As shown in
Figure 18.1, occupations are positioned on the WWM based on the degree
to which they involve working with data versus ideas on one dimension
and with people versus things on the other. The precise placement of
occupations on this matrix is informed by expert evaluations of the
occupations in question, as well as interest inventory scores for persons
working in these roles.
The WWM comprises 26 career areas that contain occupations that are
relatively homogeneous with respect to the work tasks that are required.
For example, career area V, Applied Arts (Written, Spoken) includes the
professions of reporter, ad copywriter, and editor. These areas are nested
within 12 career regions used to provide directional interest information to
students or clients. For example, a client interested broadly in the helping
professions might be encouraged to explore all occupations in Region 12
(i.e., Career Areas W, X, and Y).
The WWM is found in a range of academic and career-related products.
In conjunction with products that contain the Unisex Edition of the ACT
Interest Inventory (UNIACT; ACT, 2009), such as the Career Planning
Survey, EXPLORE, PLAN, and the ACT Assessment, counselors can use
the WWM to suggest career areas that a client might want to explore more
thoroughly based on his or her UNIACT scores. Prediger (2002) described
how the WWM could also be used to integrate results obtained from other
vocational interest inventories, ability self-estimate measures, and measures
of work-relevant values. DISCOVER, a computer-based career guidance

Your Career Possibilities
STEP 1: You and the World of Work

STEP 2: Your Interests

STEP 3: Exploring Career Options

The World-of-Work Map is your key to hundreds of jobs
in the work world. The map shows 26 Career Areas
(groups of similar jobs) according to their basic work
tasks involving people, things, data, and ideas.

When you completed EXPLORE, you were asked to:
• choose a Career Area you would like.
• complete an interest inventory.
Your results are shown on the World-of-Work Map below.
• You chose Career Area P: Natural Science &
Technologies
• Your interest inventory results suggest that you may
enjoy jobs in map regions 9, 10, and 11. See the Career
Areas in those regions.
There are many jobs in these Career Areas. For example,
Nurse Practitioners are registered nurses with advanced
education. They diagnose and treat health problems.

The Career Area List below shows examples of jobs in
each of the 26 Career Areas. Review all of the Career
Areas, especially any that are shaded.

The map is divided into 12 regions. Each region has a
different mix of work tasks. For example, Career Area
P (Natural Science & Technologies) mostly involves
working with ideas and things. Which Career Areas
mostly involve working with people and data?

Circle at least two Career Areas that have jobs you
might like best.
Find out more about jobs that are right for you. Use
the tips in your booklet, or go to www.explorestudent
.org

World-of-Work Map
Career Area List

F. Financial
Transactions

D. Regulation
ment
&
E. Communications &
B. Marketing Protection
Records
& Sales
A. EmploymentRelated
Services

Region 99

X. Education

H. Transport Operation
& Related
I. Ag/Forestry J. Computer/Info
& Related
Specialities
K. Construction
N. Mechanical
& Maintenance
& Electrical
L. Crafts &
Specialists
Related
M. Manufacturing 7
& Processing

12 W. Health Care
Q.
Medical
Technologies

LE

R.
S.
Medical
Social
Science Diagnosis
& Treatment

10

O. Engineering
& Technologies
P. Natural Science
& Technologies

8

9

Wo rking wi t h

IDEAS

Information for
Counselors

S

OP
PE

V. Applied Arts
(Written &
Spoken)
T. Applied
U. Creative &
Arts
Performing
(Visual)
Arts
11

AS

G. Distribution and
Dispatching

6

Y. Community Services

ID
E

&

5

2 C. Manage-

Z. Personal
Services

&

DA
TA

I

A
DE

S

&

Working with
THINGS

Working with
PEOPLE

1

4

3

A

TH
IN
G

&

T
DA

GS
IN
TH

PE
OP
LE

Workin g with
DATA

A. Employment-Related Services
Human Resources Manager: Recruiter;
Interviewer
B. Marketing & Sales
Agents (Insurance, Real Estate, etc.);
Retail Salesworker
C. Management
Executive; Office Manager; Hotel/Motel
Manager
D. Regulation & Protection
Food Inspector; Police Officer; Detective
E. Communications & Records
Secretary; Court Reporter; Office Clerk
F. Financial Transactions
Accountant; Bank Teller; Budget Analyst
G. Distribution & Dispatching
Warehouse Supervisor; Air Traffic
Controller
H. Transport Operation & Related
Truck/Bus/Cab Drivers; Ship Captain;
Pilot
I. Agriculture, Forestry & Related
Farmer; Nursery Manager; Forester
J. Computer & Information Specialities
Programmer; Systems Analyst; Desktop
Publisher; Actuary
K. Construction & Maintenance
Carpenter; Electrician; Bricklayer
L. Crafts & Related
Cabinetmaker; Tailor; Chef/Cook; Jeweler
M. Manufacturing & Processing
Tool & Die Maker; Machinist; Welder; Dry
Cleaner
N. Mechanical & Electrical Specialties
Auto Mechanic; Aircraft Mechanic; Office
Machine Repairer

O. Engineering & Technologies
Engineers (Civil, etc.); Technicians (Laser,
etc.); Architect
P. Natural Science & Technologies
Physicist; Biologist; Chemist; Statistician
Q. Medical Technologies (also see Area
W)
Pharmacist; Optician; Dietitian;
Technologists (Surgical, etc.)
R. Medical Diagnosis & Treatment (also
see Area W)
Physician; Pathologist; Dentist;
Veterinarian; Nurse Anesthetist
S. Social Science
Sociologist; Political Scientist; Economist;
Urban Planner
T. Applied Arts (Visual)
Artist; Illustrator; Photographer; Interior
Designer
U. Creative & Performing Arts
Writer; Musician; Singer; Dancer; TV/Movie
Director
V. Applied Arts (Written & Spoken)
Reporter; Columnist; Editor; Librarian
W. Health Care (also see Areas Q and R)
Recreational Therapist; Dental Assistant;
Licensed Practical Nurse
X. Education
Administrator; Athletic Coach; Teacher
Y. Community Services
Social Worker; Lawyer; Paralegal;
Counselor; Clergy
Z. Personal Services
Waiter/Waitress; Barber; Cosmetologist;
Travel Guide

Scores: R6 I8 A6 S6 E5 C5
%Like, Indifferent, Dislike: 43—22—35

Figure 18.1 ACT’s World-of-Work Map With Student’s Results Shaded in Gray
as Presented on the EXPLORE Score Report. UNIACT Interest Inventory results
displayed using ACT’s World-of-Work Map. Students are encouraged to further
explore shaded map regions and career areas. Copyright 2011 by ACT, Inc.
Reproduced with permission.

516

Career Development and Counseling

program, is an excellent example of how assessment results from these three
sources can be combined to encourage focused occupational exploration.
The Minnesota Occupational Classification System
The Minnesota Occupational Classificatio System (MOCS III) (Dawis,
Dohm, Lofquist, Chartrand, & Due, 1987) was developed to support applications of the Minnesota theory of work adjustment (TWA). According to
TWA, individuals will experience longevity on the job to the extent to which
(a) their needs are being met by reinforcers (such as sense of achievement,
variety of tasks, or recognition from others) in the work environment and
(b) their abilities correspond to the work requirements of the job.
Consistent with its theoretical underpinnings, the MOCS III classifie occupations according to the abilities that are required for successful performance,
as well as the reinforcer patterns that are commonly experienced in the work
environment. The MOCS III classifie the 1,769 occupational titles found in
the 1977 edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (U.S. Department of
Labor, 1977). One of the benefit of the MOCS III is that it provides clients
with a tool that can assist them in matching their values to occupations
that are likely to reinforce those values while simultaneously suggesting the
degree to which their skills will match the ability requirements of the job.
Although much of the data used to develop the MOCS III is now dated, the
work of Dawis and colleagues (Dawis, England, & Lofquist, 1964) has been
updated to serve the career development and counseling needs of O*NET
users. Through the Work Importance Profile (WIP; McCloy et al., 1999a) and
Work Importance Locator (WIL; McCloy et al., 1999b) questionnaires built
into the O*NET system, users can identify reinforcers that are important
to them and learn about settings and occupations where their needs are
most likely to be met. The O*NET online database also allows users to
browse occupations by six salient work values: achievement, independence,
recognition, relationships, support, and working conditions.
SOURCES OF OCCUPATIONAL INFORMATION
Sources of occupational information have evolved from simple pamphlets
describing a single occupation to comprehensive printed volumes and computer databases describing thousands of occupational titles. Similar to the
use of occupational classificatio systems, these sources of occupational
information are used by a range of individuals for a variety of purposes.
In this section, we describe several printed and Internet-based sources of
occupational information that are of particular use to career educators and
counselors. In doing so, we focus on sources that are either (a) in the public

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

517

domain or (b) available for purchase from vendors and widely distributed
throughout the United States.
Dictionary of Occupational Titles
The Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT; U.S. Department of Labor, 1991)
was one of the firs printed products developed in response to the call for
more accurate and comprehensive occupational information in the 1930s.
It was maintained by the U.S. Employment Service from 1939 until the
late 1990s and has now been abandoned and replaced by the O*NET. The
DOT is still available online on several sites (see, for example, http://www
.occupationalinfo.org/) and in most public libraries. The DOT provides brief
information about thousands of occupational titles, including job duties,
occupational classification and the level of skill needed for working with
data, people, and things.
Occupational Outlook Handbook
The Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH; U.S. Department of Labor, 2010)
resulted from calls for workforce projections by the Advisory Committee on Education (1938), the Serviceman’s Readjustment Act of 1944, the
Veterans Administration (which requested data to support returning veterans’ employment searches), and consultation with the National Vocational
Guidance Association (now the National Career Development Association,
NCDA). First released in 1949, the OOH continues to be published in print
and electronic form by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The OOH includes detailed information for hundreds of occupations (over
100 occupations in Spanish), including descriptions of the nature of work,
working conditions, the number and distribution of workers, training and
educational requirements, and the average earnings of job incumbents. The
OOH is unique compared to other sources of occupational information in
that it provides specifi workforce projections by occupation or occupational
group. Future job openings are influence by a complex set of factors,
including population demographics, labor force trends, technological developments, demand for goods and services, and overall economic conditions.
When these factors are systematically analyzed by the BLS, they result in
projected changes in the size of the workforce for a 10-year period.
For example, logging occupations are expected to grow more slowly than
the average for all U.S. occupations, due primarily to increased mechanization in this industry. In contrast, jobs in occupational therapy are expected
to grow by over 25% in the next decade—much faster than the national
average—as a result of the increasing size of the elderly population. Alpert

518

Career Development and Counseling

and Auyer (2003) found that the employment projections published in the
OOH have tended to be reasonably accurate. Specifically in reviewing the
projections offered between 1988 and 2000, they found that projections
were in the correct direction more than 70% of the time.
The OOH includes additional sections that may be of assistance to career
educators and counselors. One supplemental section includes descriptions
of informational interviews, the role of guidance and school counselors,
the importance of professional organizations and societies, and resources
for populations such as blind and disabled individuals, veterans, women,
and elderly workers. Another section includes detailed recommendations
for findin job openings, job search methods, applying and interviewing for
openings, and evaluating job offers. Finally, the OOH includes information
to assist students and clients in understanding their educational options for
advanced training and how to financ those options.
The Occupational Information Network
The Occupational Information Network (O*NET) was developed in 1998
primarily as a replacement for the DOT. Far from being a static electronic
resource, however, the O*NET is best characterized as a network of products,
databases, services, and projects designed to enhance the availability and
usability of occupational information by a wide range of individuals and
organizations. Data from the O*NET may be used directly by career educators
and counselors when working with individuals or small groups, uploaded
and supplemented by companies developing comprehensive computerassisted career guidance systems (described in more detail later), and used by
organizations to inform performance evaluation rubrics, job announcements,
or advanced training for job incumbents.
A complete description of the elements of the O*NET is beyond the scope of
this chapter. We focus exclusively on the O*NET database itself and recently
released products that can be used by counselors and career educators
working with students, young adults, and veterans. Readers interested in
more detailed descriptions of the projects, services, and products available
through the O*NET are encouraged to visit http://www.onetcenter.org/.
Additional information describing the career assessments available in the
O*NET are described by Hansen (Chapter 14, this volume), Rounds and Jin
(Chapter 15, this volume), and Metz and Jones (Chapter 16, this volume).
At the heart of the O*NET is an occupational database that serves as the
primary source of occupational information in the United States. The organization and elements of this database are best described by the O*NET Content
Model shown in Figure 18.2. These data include information about occupational requirements (e.g., work activities, work context, and tools used in

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

519

Exprerience Requirements
• Training
• Experience
• Licensing

Work Requirements
• Basic Skills
• Cross-Functional Skills
• General Knowledge
• Education

O*NET

Occupation Requirements
• Generalized Work
Activities
• Work Context
• Organizational Context
Occupation Specific
• Occupational Knowledge
• Occupational Skills
• Tasks
• Machines, Tools, and
Equipment

Work Characteristics
• Abilities
• Interests and Work
Values
• Work Styles
Occupation Characteristics
• Labor Market Information
• Occupational Outlook
• Wages

Figure 18.2 O*NET Content Model
Adapted from http://www.onetcenter.org/content.html.

the occupation), worker requirements (e.g., skills requirements, knowledge,
and education), and worker characteristics (e.g., interests, abilities, values,
and work styles). Additionally, the database includes information describing the specifi training and experience needed for a given occupation, as
well as any specifi certificatio or licensing required for job entry. Finally,
the database hosts national information about the labor market, including
wage information, current employment numbers, and employment projections. Users can also search similar state-specifi information (including job
postings) through a link to Career Onestop, an online service sponsored
by the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration. An example of output from the O*NET online database is included
in Table 18.1 for the occupation 21-1012.00—Educational, Guidance, School,
and Vocational Counselors.
Until recently, data in the O*NET were accessible only through the O*NET
Online (http://www.onetonline.org). The O*NET Online provides a functional interface for searching and accessing occupational information but is
not very client friendly. Now, career educators and counselors can use the
My Next Move website (http://www.mynextmove.org) at no cost to help
students search for occupations by title, browse occupations by industry,

520

Career Development and Counseling

Table 18.1
Abbreviated Output from O*NET. Occupational and Worker
Requirements and Worker Characteristics for the Occupation of
21-1012.00—Educational, Guidance, School, and
Vocational Counselors
Importance

Task

Task Description

90

Core

86

Core

85

Core

83

Core

82

Core

81

Core

81

Core

80

Core

Counsel individuals to help them understand and
overcome personal, social, or behavioral problems
affecting their educational or vocational situations.
Provide crisis intervention to students when difficul
situations occur at schools.
Confer with parents or guardians, teachers,
administrators, and other professionals to discuss
children’s progress, resolve behavioral, academic,
and other problems, and to determine priorities for
students and their resource needs.
Maintain accurate and complete student records as
required by laws, district policies, and
administrative regulations.
Prepare students for later educational experiences by
encouraging them to explore learning opportunities
and to persevere with challenging tasks.
Evaluate students’ or individuals’ abilities, interests,
and personality characteristics using tests, records,
interviews, or professional sources.
Identify cases of domestic abuse or other family
problems and encourage students or parents to
seek additional assistance from mental health
professionals.
Counsel students regarding educational issues, such
as course and program selection, class scheduling
and registration, school adjustment, truancy, study
habits, and career planning.

Importance

Knowledge

Knowledge Description

95

Psychology

91

Therapy and
Counseling

Knowledge of human behavior and performance;
individual differences in ability, personality, and
interests; learning and motivation; psychological
research methods; and the assessment and
treatment of behavioral and affective disorders.
Knowledge of principles, methods, and procedures
for diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation of
physical and mental dysfunctions, and for career
counseling and guidance.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

521

Table 18.1 (Continued)
Importance

Skill

Skill Description

85

Active Listening

85
81

Speaking
Reading
Comprehension
Social
Perceptiveness

Giving full attention to what other people are saying,
taking time to understand the points being made,
asking questions as appropriate, and not
interrupting at inappropriate times.
Talking to others to convey information effectively.
Understanding written sentences and paragraphs in
work related documents.
Being aware of others’ reactions and understanding
why they react as they do.

Ability

Ability Description

81

Importance
85

Oral Expression

81

Oral Comprehension

81

Written
Comprehension

The ability to communicate information and ideas in
speaking so others will understand.
The ability to listen to and understand information and
ideas presented through spoken words and
sentences.
The ability to read and understand information and
ideas presented in writing.

Work Activity

Work Activity Description

Importance
91

91

90

Establishing and
Maintaining
Interpersonal
Relationships
Assisting and Caring
for Others
Communicating with
Supervisors,
Peers, or
Subordinates

Developing constructive and cooperative working
relationships with others, and maintaining them
over time.
Providing personal assistance, medical attention,
emotional support, or other personal care to others
such as coworkers, customers, or patients.
Providing information to supervisors, coworkers, and
subordinates by telephone, in written form, e-mail,
or in person.

Note: Importance and other ratings are measured on different scales. To provide users with more
intuitive scores, ratings are standardized and presented on a scale ranging from 0 to 100. Higher scores
reflec higher levels of importance.

or match occupations to assessed interests and degree of desired training. Results are delivered in a colorful and easily digested presentation
and filtere to provide only the most salient elements (e.g., knowledge,
skills, abilities, educational requirements, and job outlook). An additional
site (http://www.mynextmove.org/vets/) has been established to permit
veterans to search for civilian occupations that are similar to their military
occupational specialty. These two sites represent the O*NET’s ongoing effort

522

Career Development and Counseling

to provide resources for career educators and counselors working with
school-age children and young adults. More counselor resources, including free access to interest, values, and ability assessments, can be found at
http://www.onetcenter.org/tools.html
Comprehensive Internet-Based Sources of Career Information
It is probably safe to assume that a large percentage of career exploration
today occurs on the Internet. Computer-assisted career guidance (CACG)
systems (also referred to as career information delivery systems or CIDS)
have been available since the 1960s, though recently made more accessible as systems became available on personal computers and through the
Internet. These systems have many advantages over print-based resources
in that CACG systems can deliver and score career assessment tools in real
time and provide results to clients and counselors immediately. Moreover,
those results can be logically linked to congruent occupational and educational information to facilitate the transition from self-understanding to
occupational and educational exploration (Gore et al., 2006).
There currently exist dozens of CACG systems. These systems are available
to individuals, schools, districts, colleges and universities, and workforce
development services. A growing number of U.S. states are choosing to
adopt a CACG system for use by all state citizens and organizations. Next
we review a subset of CACG systems that are widely available in the United
States today.
intoCareers (CIS). The University of Oregon has a not-for-profi outreach
center, intoCareers (http://www.intocareers.org), that has been producing
career information system (CIS) products for over 30 years. Products developed by intoCareers are currently in use by over 20 states and include
(a) the basic CIS system for career and educational exploration (designed for
high school students and beyond), (b) CIS Junior, which includes a suite of
academic planning and career exploration tools for middle school students,
and (c) Career Trek, a career awareness program for younger children in
the elementary grades. CIS includes a suite of formal interest assessments
(O*NET Interest Profiler IDEAS, Career Cluster Inventory), as well as a skills
self-rating instrument and the O*NET Work Importance Locator (values),
among other features. CIS Junior and Career Trek include fewer, and more
informal (Career Trek), assessment materials.
The model of intoCareer is to deliver state-specifi data combined with
national data in an Internet-based platform that can be customized to meet
the specifi needs of each state. The backbone of the CIS database consists
of occupational information based on data obtained from the O*NET and

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

523

supplemented with additional information from the OOH and publications
produced by professional organizations and state-specifi sources. Users can
access the occupational database using an occupational sort by linking from
assessment results or by selecting one of the U.S. Department of Education’s
16 career clusters. The occupational model includes interviews with job
incumbents, occupational videos, the identificatio of environment-friendly
or green jobs, and links to related military careers. Additional data sets
describe postsecondary programs of study and colleges and universities.
State-level customization provides opportunities to extend the role of
the CIS beyond what is typically encountered in stand-alone products
such as those described here later. For example, the State of Utah decided
to include a measure of noncognitive strengths and deficits the Student
Strengths Inventory (http://www.campuslabs.com/products/beacon/), in
UtahFutures, the Utah state CIS (http://www.utahfutures.org). Using this
information, Utah school counselors are able to assess college and work
readiness in their upper-level high school students with more than grades
and standardized achievement test scores. Other states have created data
shares between the CIS and their state workforce development services and
jobs sites (e.g., Idaho, Illinois, and New Jersey). Finally, customization at the
state level also permits users to preload a database describing high school
course numbers and names by school so that the CIS system can be used
by school counselors to create academic course sequences and plans when
meeting with their students.
SIGI3 . SIGI3 (http://www.sigi3.org) is the most recent version of a system
that was originally developed by Martin Katz (1963) as the system for
interactive guidance information (SIGI). Originally designed to help students
identify occupational alternatives based on assessment of work values and
skills, SIGI3 continues this tradition today by including a values card-sort
activity, a skills self-assessment, and two interest assessments.
The Values card-sort exercise uses a forced-preference technique (24 value
statements) similar to that found in the Work Importance Locator (McCloy
et al., 1999a). Values assessment results are organized in eight categories
(Contribution to Society, High Income, Independence, Leadership, Leisure,
Prestige, Security, and Variety); users can select value categories to see a
list of occupations likely to reinforce that value. The more formal interest
assessment includes 30 forced-choice items and results in a profil with
scores on eight dimensions (Arts and Humanities; Business; Education;
Engineering; Health; Science, Math and Agriculture; Social and Behavioral
Sciences; and Trades and Technology). Similar to results from the values
assessment, users can view a list of occupations that are congruent with high

524

Career Development and Counseling

interest scores. The skills self-assessment includes 35 items organized into
six Holland-like domains (six or seven items in each domain). Users are firs
asked to rate themselves as ‘‘good’’ or ‘‘not good’’ on each item and then
to select the strongest skill from their ‘‘good’’ list. Users are then linked to
occupational titles that require skills reflecte in their assessment results.
Like other systems described in this chapter, users can search for occupations using assessment results and combinations of assessment results or
by title or postsecondary academic major title. Occupational information
in SIGI3 appears to be directly exported from the O*NET database and is
presented in a functional, albeit not very user-friendly form. Unlike some
other systems, SIGI3 does not contain its own postsecondary educational
database. The system includes a module for users to maintain their portfolio
(e.g., assessment results, favorite occupations, and educational aspirations),
a basic resume-building module, and links to standardized achievement test
prep sites.
Career Cruising. Established in 1997, Career Cruising (http://public.career
cruising.com/us/en) is one of the more recent additions to the family of
online career guidance systems and is currently used by over 19,000 institutions across North America. Career Cruising is part of a broader network of
services that also includes a high school Course Planner, a college Application Planner, a Test Prep platform, and a Network platform that allows users
to connect to local businesses for the purposes of coordinating internships,
arranging fiel trips, or viewing available employment opportunities.
Career Cruising includes six primary modules: Main, Assessments,
Careers, Schools, Employment, and the Portfolio. The Main module serves
as a landing portal and a place where occupations can be featured. The
Assessments module hosts four primary assessment instruments: interests,
skills, abilities, and learning styles. The foundation of the Career Cruising
assessment is the Career Matchmaker. Users complete the 39 items that make
up the core Matchmaker inventory using a 5-point response system (‘‘dislike
very much’’ to ‘‘like very much’’). Users have the option of completing an
additional 77 items. Unlike many interest inventories in use today, linkages
between Matchmaker assessment results and occupational recommendations are based on a detailed job analysis of primary occupational activities
rather than Holland codes. A recent analysis of the core items of the
Matchmaker system, however, revealed that the items more than adequately
reproduce a Holland-like factor structure (Gore & Leuwerke, 2011).
Rather than relying solely on self-assessments of skills or abilities, Career
Cruising includes the O*NET Ability Profile (McCloy, Campbell, Oswald,
Lewis, & Rivkin, 1999), a timed and proctored paper-and-pencil assessment
of six ability domains (for more information, see Metz & Jones, Chapter 16,

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

525

this volume). For career educators and counselors looking for a less formal
instrument, Career Cruising also includes a 45-item skills self-assessment, the
results of which are linked to appropriate occupational titles. Finally, Career
Cruising includes a 20-item measure of visual, tactile, and auditory learning
preferences that can be used to provide students with recommendations that
may optimize their approach to academic coursework or enhance decisions
regarding future educational and training opportunities.
The Careers and Schools modules are portals to internal databases of occupations and postsecondary educational opportunities and sites. The Careers
module includes detailed information about each occupation, including a job
description, working conditions, earnings, educational requirements, career
paths, and related careers. The data appear to supplement those provided
by O*NET databases. Also in this module are interviews with male and
female job incumbents and a photo fil of pictures related to the occupation.
The Schools database includes profile of 2- and 4-year colleges, as well as
vocational schools. Users can search for schools or academic programs using
a number of search criteria and identify schools that offer training programs
or academic majors that lead to specifi careers through a ‘‘related college
programs’’ option that links the school and career databases.
The Employment module contains helpful information about preparing
a resume, conducting a job search, interviewing, and evaluating job offers.
Additionally, Career Cruising has partnered with Indeed (http://www
.indeed.com), an online job listing site, allowing users to search for current
openings. The Portfolio module provides the option to save favorites, review
assessment results, or authorize portfolio access by others, and it also features an online journal that the client can use to reflec on his or her career
exploration. Features like the Portfolio Completion Standards, messaging
tools, and Assignments and Activities support structured portfolio development. Career counselors have access to a suite of administrative tools for
tracking users’ progress, configurin the system to meet their specifi needs,
and generating aggregate reports on system usage and stored portfolio data.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN THE USE OF CAREER INFORMATION
Career practitioners must understand the ethical challenges of using occupational information systems and take appropriate precautions to ensure
that students and clients are well served by career interventions. In this
section, we highlight several ethical issues that can arise when working with
occupational information systems and offer guidelines related to integrating
Internet-based applications into existing career counseling and education
interventions. These ethical issues are drawn, in part, from the publications noted here, and career practitioners who regularly use occupational

526

Career Development and Counseling

information systems are encouraged to download and integrate the following resources into their practice. The National Career Development
Association (NCDA) and the Association of Computer-Based Systems for
Career Information (ACSCI) provide ethical standards, practice guidelines,
and implementation standards to promote appropriate utilization and presentation of career information. In addition to its Code of Ethics (NCDA,
2007), NCDA has published Career Counseling Competencies (NCDA, 2009)
and NCDA Guidelines for the Use of the Internet for the Provision of Career Information and Planning Services (NCDA, 1997). ACSCI (2009) has also published
Standards Implementation Handbook, which outlines minimum qualification
in the areas of core standards, components, integration, and information
delivery aspects of career information systems.
Career counselors working with students and clients in any setting should
be aware of the following general ethical practices. First, career professionals
should utilize systems with which they are competent to work. This requires
proper education, training, and/or supervision in the use of each system.
Second, because many occupational information systems contain assessment
tools (e.g., interests, values, skills), counselors must consider the psychometric properties of all instruments and evaluate their appropriateness for
particular client groups. Third, counselors who encourage clients to explore
occupational information systems on their own need to establish processes
to monitor their progress. Current occupational information systems are vast
stores of occupational content that can easily overwhelm users. Practitioners
who are working with clients at a distance or with students with whom they
do not meet regularly should create procedures to evaluate progress and
ensure that information exploration goals are being met. For example, the
second author recommends that his clients set time and occupation limits,
such as 45 minutes and three occupations for each search, to help them
effectively manage exploration sessions.
Fourth, as supported by research mentioned earlier, practitioners should
use occupational information systems as one component of a comprehensive
career intervention rather than simply referring clients to a source of information and leaving them to explore it on their own (Brown et al., 2003). Finally,
counselors should evaluate the appropriateness of a given occupational
information system for their clients. Young students or individuals with
intellectual or reading disabilities might not benefi from computer-based
information systems or may need additional supports to achieve positive
outcomes (Hutchinson, Freeman, Downey, & Kilbreath, 1992).
Many occupational information systems, such as the Occupational Outlook Handbook (U.S. Department of Labor, 2010), have migrated from print
to computer-based applications and then onto the Internet (http://www
.bls.gov/oco/). Although this evolution has been tremendously beneficia

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

527

in expanding access to this information, it also raises ethical challenges that
practitioners must address. Career professionals should caution students
about transmitting personal information online and alert them that confi
dentiality cannot be guaranteed. To maximize safety, counselors should also
determine whether Web sites requiring clients to provide personal information hold an SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificat documenting the use
of encryption methods to protect information transmitted over the Internet.
This information can normally be found at the bottom of the browser window or in a Web site’s security information section. Practitioners should also
develop procedures to ensure that client information stored on their computers is secure and that records are purged according to applicable laws and
guidelines. Awareness of these ethical issues positions career professionals
to appropriately and responsibly use occupational information systems to
help students and clients achieve their career development goals.
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
Occupational information sources and CACG systems provide tremendous
opportunities for career counselors and educators to connect individuals
to career information, encourage exploration, and facilitate the process of
making academic and career choices. Moreover, the integration of career
assessments and easy online access create opportunities for career professionals to integrate career information into their classes and practices, both
inside and outside of session. This section describes practices that integrate occupational information systems into career interventions organized
around tasks of exploration, choice, and implementation when working with
school-age students and early career clients.
Exploration
Students frequently begin active career exploration in secondary school. The
American School Counseling Association (ASCA, 2005) identifie individual
student planning as one of the core activities that professional school counselors conduct in their practice. Many students’ firs exposure to a career
information system might occur as part of a classroom guidance lesson or
in a small group in the school counselor’s office Other counselors meet
individually with students to go through occupational information systems
or to plan high school coursework based on interests and academic goals.
Many states, meanwhile, either encourage or require career and academic
exploration starting in middle school. This exploration is often facilitated by
statewide adoption of CACG systems that allow students, counselors, teachers, and parents to access career information. The longitudinal utilization

528

Career Development and Counseling

of these systems represents an additional benefi of this approach. Students
who create an account in middle school can continue to utilize a CACG
system through high school and into postsecondary education or training,
providing continuity in their career exploration, as well as comfort and
familiarity with the system (Kucker, 2000).
Career development goals at the middle school and high school levels
include exposing students to career information and information systems; providing students with information search skills; fostering selfunderstanding of interests, skills, and values; and engaging in academic
and career planning (Dahir, Burnham, & Stone, 2009). These activities can
be accomplished through the effective use of career information systems
(Turner & Lapan, 2005). For example, intoCareers offers CIS Junior, a set
of tools for middle school students to engage in self-assessment, begin
academic planning, and start exploring careers. Systems such as CIS Junior
often include lesson plans that counselors can use to deliver classroom-based
guidance or consult with teachers who wish to integrate guidance elements
into their existing lesson plans. For example, a history teacher might develop
an assignment called ‘‘Careers Now, Careers Then’’ and require students to
compare a contemporary career of their choice to a comparable occupation in
the historical period being studied. This might include a description of typical
daily activities, core competencies, educational requirements, and a forecast
of future employment opportunities. Such exercises provide students with
an opportunity to learn how to access and evaluate career information and
simultaneously support the existing academic curriculum.
Individuals at secondary and postsecondary levels benefi from systematic
individual student planning, as well as regular academic and career exploration activities (Paisley & McMahon, 2001). CACG systems that integrate
portfolios, resume builders, and saved assessment results facilitate these
activities and provide students with long-term access to career information. At this level, counselors and career educators can also support career
exploration through reflectio on completed coursework and experience
outside the classroom (e.g., job shadowing, service learning experiences,
internships, and volunteer or paid work), which students can then connect
to information exploration using a computer-based system. Programs such
as My Next Move (http://www.mynextmove.org) provides easily navigable search tools by keyword, industry, or completion of the O*NET Interest
Profile and can be used at no cost to the school or student. Older students and individuals preparing to enter the workforce can utilize the OOH
(U.S. Department of Labor, 2010) to identify professional associations that
provide information about training, internship, or shadowing opportunities, as well as potential mentors who might facilitate career exploration
and entry.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

529

Choice
Career choice at the secondary level typically includes selection of high
school coursework, articulation of career/technical training goals, development of plans for college coursework, and possibly college major decisions
(Peterson, Long, & Billups, 1999). CACG systems support these choices
by storing students’ plans in portfolios and by integrating academic and
vocational information to facilitate the choice process. Some states go so
far as to mandate the creation of an academic/career plan at the secondary
level. School counselors can input high school course schedules to support
students’ articulation of their academic plans, and parents, teachers, and
mentors can access this information and provide input as students prepare
for work and education beyond high school.
Career and educational choices following high school involve pursuing
postsecondary education or training, identifying college majors, and choosing a career path. The role of career professionals at this point is to highlight
and process the actions involved in making a choice based on the information clients have acquired in school and through their own exploration.
CACG systems that maintain portfolios allow individuals to engage in goal
setting, creating new career plans, and continued exploring as they continue
to make career choices. The critical task of the career professional is to aid
individuals in understanding how career development is a lifelong skill. A
CACG system that maintains client information over time is an ideal framework for counselors to engage with clients to attain current career goals
while also preparing individuals to tackle future career challenges, such as
acquiring new skills or responding to an unexpected career change (Bobek
et al., 2005). Career information websites also include tools to directly connect clients to careers. The Network platform of the Career Cruising system
allows counselors to collaborate with local employers to create resources for
students to learn about and select internships, training opportunities, or job
openings. For instance, a counselor might create pages for all construction
companies within 100 miles of campus. The employers have the opportunity
to connect with current students and new graduates and communicate the
skills they are seeking in new employees. At the same time, clients can learn
about companies and make choices based on information tailored to their
specifi field
Implementation
Individuals implement academic and career choices through enrolling in
courses, engaging in job shadowing, and pursuing early work experiences.
Career counselors serve as a tremendous resource to students and early
career entrants by providing interventions that promote college and career

530

Career Development and Counseling

readiness. For instance, career professionals can use the ability assessments
incorporated into most CACGs to assist individuals in evaluating their skills
and develop plans to enhance their college and career readiness. ACT’s
Explore platform combines assessment results with specifi activities students can use to improve skills in the assessed areas (e.g., mathematics,
reading). Counselors and clients can use this information to write and implement plans to improve skill defici areas. Also, intoCareers includes a skill
assessment that connects users’ skills to occupations. As individuals acquire
knowledge about critical skills in their future occupation, they can take
active steps to build the habits critical to success in their fiel of interest.
For example, understanding the importance of communication, accountability, and attention to detail will motivate some students to improve their
present performance to achieve longer-term goals. Teachers and counselors,
meanwhile, can highlight the importance of teamwork and oral communication through class projects, reinforce accountability through class deadlines,
or build conscientiousness by encouraging students to arrive on time prepared to actively participate. Early career clients can work with their career
counselor to identify ways to build these skills (e.g., oral communication,
teamwork) on the job, such as taking lead responsibility for the presentation
of a new product. These noncognitive or ‘‘soft skills’’ were recently identifie as some of the most sought-after skills in a large national sample of
U.S. employees and employers (U.S. Chamber of Commerce & University of
Phoenix, 2011).
CACG systems also include resources that clients can utilize throughout their lifetimes. Resume-building templates allow individuals to craft a
resume from information they have already entered regarding work, volunteer, and extracurricular activities and may also have the capacity to build
objective statements from individuals’ academic and career goals or develop
a summary profil based on skills and values assessment results. Many systems also include online modules or classroom activities to support career
educators and counselors in educating clients about cover letters, personal
statements, and preparing for interviews. As an example, the CACG system available to all Iowa residents includes an interview practice tool that
provides job seekers common interview questions, tips for responding, and
an opportunity to write out answers. Counselors can bolster their clients’
interview performance through activities such as assigning these modules
as homework and then practicing interviewing in session (Maurer, Solamon,
Andrews, & Troxtel, 2001). This is just one example of the tremendous career
information tools available to counselors to support clients throughout the
career development process.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

531

CONCLUSIONS
Occupational information is a critical element of career development and
counseling at all ages and is now more widely available to career educators
and counselors and to their students and clients than ever before in history.
Clearly, additional work remains as we develop our understanding of how
to best promote the exploration of occupational information. In a recent
review of the career exploration literature, Taveira and Moreno (2003) offer
a rubric to guide future research and practice in this area. Their rubric
poses a number of questions that remain to be answered: Why do people
explore, how much value do they attribute to exploratory behavior, how
confiden are they exploring, where and how do they explore, what kind of
conditions promote or inhibit exploration, and what occurs after information
is acquired? Answers to these questions would greatly assist career educators
and counselors in their efforts to provide more effective and efficien services
to their students and clients.
The following are some useful recommendations related to the use of
career information in career education and counseling:
• Educators and counselors should be familiar with current systems of

classifying occupational information and how those systems might be
used most appropriately based on student and client needs.
• Educators and counselors should be familiar with comprehensive
computer-assisted career guidance systems and recognize their appropriateness for use with students and clients of varying ages and needs.
• Educators and counselors need to use sources of occupational information in an ethical manner, which means being familiar with the
psychometric properties and appropriate uses of assessment instruments, as well as the currency and appropriateness of occupational
information for students and clients at varying developmental levels.
• Advances in our understanding of the developmental precursors to
career exploration and occupational information gathering offer opportunities for educators and counselors working with younger children to better tailor their interventions and be more helpful to their
students.
• Educators and counselors should familiarize themselves with recent
research on the effectiveness of occupational exploration and how the
effectiveness of exploration can be enhanced by combining occupational
information gathering and exploration with other key intervention
strategies.

532

Career Development and Counseling

REFERENCES
ACT. (2009). ACT Interest Inventory technical manual (UNIACT). Iowa City, IA:
American College Testing.
Advisory Committee on Education. (1938). Report of the committee (p. 104).
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office
Alpert, A., & Auyer, J. (2003, Spring). The 1988–2000 employment projections: How
accurate were they? Occupational Outlook Quarterly, 2–21.
American School Counseling Association. (2005). The ASCA national model: A framework for school counseling programs (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: Author.
Association of Computer-Based Systems of Career Information. (2009). Standards
implementation handbook. Stillwater, OK: Author.
Betz, N. E., Borgen, F. H., & Harmon, L. W. (2005). Manual for the Skills Confidence
Inventory (rev. ed.). Mountain View, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Bobek, B. L., Robbins, S. B., Gore, P. A., Jr., Harris-Bowlsbey, J., Lapan, R. T.,
Dahir, C. A., & Jepsen, D. A. (2005). Training counselors to use computer-assisted
career guidance systems more effectively: A model curriculum. Career Development
Quarterly, 53, 363–371.
Brayfield A. H., & Reed, P. A. (1950). How readable are occupational information
booklets? Journal of Applied Psychology, 34, 325–328.
Brewer, J. M. (1942). Using existing facilities and developing new. In J. M. Brewer,
E. J. Cleary, C. C. Dunsmoor, J. S. Lake, C. J. Nichols, C. M. Smith, & H. P. Smith
(Eds.), History of vocational guidance: Origins and early development (pp. 121–136).
New York, NY: Harper & Brothers.
Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or five sessions and a cloud of dust:
Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Brown, S. D., Ryan Krane, N. E., Brecheisen, J., Castelino, P., Budisin, I., Miller, M., &
Edens, L. (2003). Critical ingredients of career choice interventions: More analyses
and new hypotheses. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 411–428.
Clark, F. E., & Murtland, C. (1946). Occupational information in counseling: Present
practices and historical development, Occupations, 24, 451–475.
Crites, J. O. (1976). Career counseling: A comprehensive approach. Counseling
Psychologist, 3, 2–12.
Dahir, C. A., Burnham, J. J., & Stone, C. (2009). Listen to the voices: School counselors
and comprehensive school counseling programs. Professional School Counseling, 12,
182–192.
Dawis, R. V., Dohm, T. E., Lofquist, L. H., Chartrand, J. M., & Due, A. M. (1987).
Minnesota occupational classification system III. Minneapolis: Vocational Psychology
Research, University of Minnesota.
Dawis, R. V., England, G. W., & Lofquist, L. H. (1964). A theory of work adjustment:
Minnesota studies in vocational rehabilitation, no. 15. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Industrial Relations Center.
Donnay, D. A. C., Morris, M. L., Schaubhut, N. A., & Thompson, R. C. (2005). Strong
Interest Inventory manual. Mountain View, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

533

Gati, I., & Amir, T. (2010). Applying a systemic procedure to locate career decisionmaking difficulties Career Development Quarterly, 58, 301–320.
Gati, I., Krausz, M., & Osipow, S. H. (1996). A taxonomy of difficultie in career
decision making. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43, 510–526.
Gore, P. A., Jr., Bobek, B. L., Robbins, S. B., & Shayne, L. (2006). Computer-based
career exploration: Usage patterns and a typology of users. Journal of Career
Assessment, 14, 421–436.
Gore, P. A., Jr., & Hitch, J. L. (2005). Occupational classificatio and sources of
occupational information. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development
and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 382–413). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Gore, P. A., Jr., & Leuwerke, W. (2011). Career cruising: Matchmaker scale evaluation
report. Unpublished manuscript.
Gottfredson, G. D., & Holland, J. L. (1996). Dictionary of Holland occupational codes
(3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hartung, P. J. (1999). Work illustrated: Attending to visual images in career information materials. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 234–241.
Hirschi, A. (2011). Career-choice readiness in adolescence: Developmental trajectories and individual differences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79, 340–348.
Hoffner, C. A., Levine, K. J., Sullivan, Q. E., Crowell, D., Pedrick, L., & Berndt,
P. (2006). TV characters at work: Television’s role in the occupational aspirations of economically disadvantaged youth. Journal of Career Development, 33,
3–18.
Holland, J. L. (1987). The Self-Directed Search professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hoppock, R., & Spiegler, S. (1941). 66 best books on occupational information and
guidance. Arranged in suggested order of purchase for an average public school
library. Oxford, UK: Occupational Index.
Hutchinson, N. L., Freeman, J. G., Downey, K. H., & Kilbreath, L. (1992). Development and evaluation of an instructional module to promote career maturity for
youth with learning difficulties Canadian Journal of Counselling, 26, 290–299.
Jordan, T. E., & Pope, M. L. (2001). Developmental antecedents to adolescents’ occupational knowledge: A 17-year prospective study. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
58, 279–292.
Kanfer, R., Wanberg, C. R., & Kantrowitz, T. M. (2001). Job search and employment:
A personality-motivational analysis and meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 837–855.
Katz, M. R. (1963). Decisions and values. New York, NY: College Entrance Examination
Board.
Kucker, M. (2000). South Dakota’s model for career and life planning. Journal of
Career Development, 27, 133–148.
Lewis, P., & Rivkin, D. (1999). Development of the O*NET Interest Profiler. Raleigh,
NC: National Center for O*NET Development.

534

Career Development and Counseling

Markham, W. T. (1943). Occupational guidance has six facets. School Executive, 62,
20–23.
Maurer, T. J., Solamon, J. M., Andrews, K. D., & Troxtel, D. D. (2001). Interviewee
coaching, preparation strategies, and response strategies in relation to performance in situational employment interviews: An extension of Maurer, Solamon,
and Troxtel (1998). Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 709–717.
McCloy, R., Campbell, J., Oswald, F. L., Lewis, P., & Rivkin, D. (1999). Linking client
assessment profiles to O*NET occupational profiles. Raleigh, NC: National Center for
O*NET Development.
McCloy, R., Waugh, G., Medsker, G., Wall, J., Rivkin, D., & Lewis, P. (1999a).
Development of the O*NET computerized Work Importance Profiler. Raleigh, NC:
National Center for O*NET Development.
McCloy, R., Waugh, G., Medsker, G., Wall, J., Rivkin, D., & Lewis, P. (1999b).
Development of the O*NET paper-and-pencil Work Importance Locator. Raleigh, NC:
National Center for O*NET Development.
McMahon, M., Carroll, J., & Gillies, R. M. (2001). Occupational aspirations of
sixth-grade children. Journal of Career Development, 10, 25–31.
McMahon, M., & Watson, M. (2005). Occupational information: What children want
to know. Journal of Career Development, 31, 239–249.
Millar, R., & Shevlin, M. (2003). Predicting career information-seeking behavior of
school pupils using the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
62, 26–42.
National Career Development Association. (1997). NCDA guidelines for the use of
the Internet for provision of career information and planning services. Columbus, OH:
Author.
National Career Development Association. (2007). Code of ethics. Columbus, OH:
Author.
National Career Development Association (2009). Career counseling competencies.
Columbus, OH: Author.
Paisley, P. O., & McMahon, H. G. (2001). School counseling for the 21st century:
Challenges and opportunities. Professional School Counseling, 5, 106–115.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing your vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin
Patton, W. A., & McCrindle, A. R. (2001). Senior students’ views on career information: What was the most useful and what would they like. Australian Journal of
Career Development, 10, 32–36.
Peterson, G. W., Long, K. L., & Billups, A. (1999). The effect of three career interventions on educational choices of eighth graders. Professional School Counseling,
9, 136–143.
Porfeli, E. J., Hartung, P. J., & Vondracek, F. W. (2008). Children’s vocational
development: A research rationale. Career Development Quarterly, 57, 25–37.
Posthuma, R. A., Morgeson, F. P., & Campion, M. A. (2002). Beyond employment
interview validity: A comprehensive narrative review of recent research and
trends over time. Personnel Psychology, 55, 1–81.
Prediger, D. J. (1982). Dimensions underlying Holland’s hexagon. Missing link
between interest and occupations. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 21, 259–287.

The Structure, Sources, and Uses of Occupational Information

535

Prediger, D. J. (2002). Abilities, interest, and values: Their assessment and their integration via the World-of-Work Map. Journal of Career Assessment, 10(2), 209–232.
Rohr, E., & Speer, D. (1948). The guidance service uses the school newspaper.
Occupations, 26, 363.
Rounds, J. B. (1995). Vocational interests: Evaluating structural hypotheses. In D. J.
Lubinski & R. V. Dawis (Eds.), Assessing individual differences in human behavior:
New concepts, methods, and findings (pp. 177–232). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Saks, A. M. (2005). Job search success: A review and integration of the predictors,
behaviors, and outcomes. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development
and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 155–179). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Shartle, C. L. (1946). Occupational information: Its development and application. New
York, NY: Prentice Hall.
Strang, R. (1945). Use in counseling of information about vocations. School Review,
53, 526–529.
Taveira, M. D. C., & Moreno, M. L. R. (2003). Guidance theory and practice: The
status of career exploration. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 31, 189–207.
Turner, S. L., & Lapan, R. T. (2005). Evaluation of an intervention to increase nontraditional career interests and career-related self-efficac among middle school
students. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 516–531.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, & University of Phoenix. (2011, September 27). Life
in the 21st century workforce, A national perspective. Retrieved from http://
icw.uschamber.com/sites/default/file /Life%20in%20the%2021st%20Century
%20Workforce.pdf
U.S. Department of Labor. (1991). Dictionary of occupational titles (4th ed.).
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office
U.S. Department of Labor. (2010). Occupational outlook handbook (2010–2011 ed.).
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office
Walls, R. T. (2000). Vocational cognition: Accuracy of 3rd-, 6th-, 9th-, and 12th-grade
students. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56, 137–144.
Williamson, E. G. (1937). A college class in occupational information. School Review,
45, 123–129.
Zikic, J., & Saks, A. M. (2009). Job search and social cognitive theory: The role of
career relevant activities. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 117–127.

SECTION FOUR

COUNSELING,
DEVELOPMENTAL,
AND PREVENTIVE
INTERVENTIONS

C H A P T E R 19

Promotion of Career Awareness,
Development, and School Success
in Children and Adolescents
SHERRI L. TURNER AND RICHARD T. LAPAN

T

HE PRIMARY GOAL OF this chapter is to discuss how professional school

counselors, career counselors, career educators, and psychologists can
create career awareness, support career development, and promote
school success in children and adolescents. The discussion of creating career
awareness focuses on the types and nature of career information that young
people need, and how this information can be shared most effectively
with them. The discussion of supporting career development is organized
around the Integrative Contextual Model of Career Development (Lapan,
2004; Turner & Lapan, 2005b). The discussion of promoting school success
focuses on the importance of offering both academic and career development
counseling interventions for young people. Assisting K–12 young people in
these areas can help them create more satisfying, productive, and fulﬁlling
adult lives. Other chapters in this book, most notably those on major theories
(see, for example, Chapters 3, 4, and 5), diversity, and individual differences,
also attend to issues of career awareness, career development, and school
success. We cite these chapters as appropriate. The reader is also referred to
these chapters to supplement what we cover in the present chapter.
CREATING CAREER AWARENESS
Career awareness, or what people know about the occupational world
and the types of work they might want to do, is foundational to career
exploration, which in turn can lead to career preparation, career choice, and
539

540

Career Development and Counseling

career attainment. In the Developmental Theory of Occupational Choice,
Ginzberg, Ginsburg, Axelrad, and Herma (1950) proposed that children’s
initial career awareness is founded more on fantasy than on reality. In this
fantasy stage, young children’s career awareness is based on a ‘‘rather loose
integration of fantasies or assumptions as well as actual observations of
adults working’’ (Hill, 1969). Children enter the tentative stage at about
age 11, when they begin to become aware of themselves in relation to the
world of work, and then at about age 18 they enter the realistic stage, where
interests and choices become more crystallized.
Super, in building on the Ginzberg et al. theory, proposed that career
awareness is born out of curiosity, fantasies, capacities, and interests (see
Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume). Through a process of orientation to vocational choice, gathering information and planning, and developing one’s
self-concept, career choices are eventually made. Assisting children in this
process, by providing appropriate and timely information, can be fundamental to helping them become aware of a broad range of career possibilities.
Gottfredson (1981), in building on Super and Ginzberg, highlighted the
process that socialization plays in children’s developing career awareness.
In her Theory of Circumscription and Compromise (1981), she proposes
that young people are highly motivated by their understanding of socially
prescribed gender and prestige roles. Thus, social class and background
become integrated into their view of self and their place in the world as
they consider their own interests, values, competencies, and intelligence.
In this theory, children (ages 3 to 5) become oriented to size and power,
or what it means to be an adult in their world. From ages 6 to 8, they
become aware of socially prescribed sex roles. Between 9 and 13, they
become oriented to social valuation (i.e., the roles that social class and
abilities play in their occupational aspirations and choices). As discussed
later in this chapter, at age 14, they begin to more actively circumscribe
their aspirations based on these views until they ﬁnally compromise in their
educational and vocational choices so that their own interests and abilities are
sacriﬁced, at least partially, to their views of societal expectations. Research
that has tested this theory has shown that young people indeed identify
occupations as gender-appropriate or gender-inappropriate, and that there
is high agreement among them regarding this gender-based identiﬁcation
(e.g., Turner & Lapan, 2005a).
In examining ways to create career awareness among young people,
researchers have found that ‘‘the top sources of information are family
(parents and relatives), school personnel (teachers and counselors), and
friends’’ (Lane Workforce Partnership, 2011). According to this study, to
search out information about careers, 56% of young people go to websites
ﬁrst, followed by television. Less than half ﬁnd information at job fairs or in

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

541

the newspaper (Lane Workforce Partnership, 2011). Researchers have also
explored the types of information that young people desire to have. In a study
conducted in South Africa and Australia among English-speaking, middleand upper-strata socio-economic 11- to 14-year-olds (McMahon & Watson,
2006), participants expressed a need for information related to life/career
implications and life/career management tasks, and to a lesser extent, for
information related to interests, personal characteristics, and the nature
of work. Life/career implications included information related to stress,
earnings, lifestyle, and conditions of employment. Life/career management
tasks included information such as how to ﬁnd jobs or apprenticeships.
Information regarding the nature of work included information such as job
requirements and skills needed.
Several authors have suggested other ways that career awareness can be
promoted among children and adolescents. For example, among elementary
children, career awareness can be enhanced by taking them to visit various
places of work and discussing with them the types of jobs that people do
there (e.g., Beale, 2000). When doing so, counselors can help these children
explore what it would be like for a person of the opposite gender to work in
the jobs they are exploring (Turner & Lapan, 2005a).
For older children and adolescents, mentoring can help broaden their
awareness of various types of occupations, including the job tasks, attitudes,
and supports needed to work successfully in that occupation. Research has
suggested that mentoring is especially important for young people in rural
areas who have less access to role models with expertise in particular types
of work. They may also have fewer opportunities to explore through their
school curricula how the skills they are learning in school apply to work. In
particular, e-mentoring through using advanced technologies, such as videoconferencing, has been shown to be a promising intervention. For example,
Li, Moorman, and Dyjur (2010) conducted a mixed-methods study of a
semester-long intervention that combined e-mentoring with inquiry-based
learning in order to facilitate math performance and the awareness of math
careers. Results showed gains in math scores for the treatment group who
did receive the intervention, but not the control group who did not receive
the intervention. Further, treatment group participants reported a broader
understanding of the relevance of math and science, an increased awareness
of math and science careers, and a greater engagement and motivation to
learn math and science.
Finally, research has suggested that in order for young people to pursue
certain specialized careers, they need to gain early awareness of these careers
so that they can prepare adequately in pre-high school and high school for
entry into training facilities. An example of this is the pursuit of higherlevel health careers (e.g., medical doctors, physician assistants), where solid

542

Career Development and Counseling

progress in math and science in high school is necessary for subsequent
entry into corresponding training programs. In a study that demonstrates
how young people can be helped to explore these specialized careers,
African American middle-school students participated in a 3-year health
career awareness program that emphasized lectures, video presentations,
interactive discussions, and college campus visits. Results showed that
55% of the students indicated an interest in pursuing health professions at
post-test (Balogun, Sloan, & Hardney, 2005).
Taken together, the literature indicates that young people beneﬁt from
interventions designed to enhance their career awareness. These interventions can include (a) providing information in ways that are accessible to
young people, (b) helping young people confront gender biases concerning
the appropriateness of various careers for men and women at an early
age, (c) providing technology-enhanced mentoring, and (d) concentrating
on strategies that can help them become aware of specialized careers that
require early planning, sometimes prior to entering college, and that are
dependent on both high school and college academic performance.
SUPPORTING CAREER DEVELOPMENT
Despite limited research concerning the career development of young children, relationships among such variables as personality traits, vocational
interests, perceived competencies, vocational aspirations, and career orientations have been found in children as young as 8 years old (e.g., Prime
et al., 2010; Whiston & Brecheisen, 2002). Several studies have yielded evidence supporting hypothesized relationships among personality and career
variables (e.g., congruence between interests, intentions, and choices) among
early and later adolescents as well (see Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11, this volume). The results of these and other investigations have led researchers and
practitioners toward the goal of more thoroughly understanding the career
development needs of young people, and toward establishing empirically
supported career interventions.
The Integrative Contextual Model (ICM) of Career
Development: Introduction
Career development, as the word suggests, is a ‘‘developmental’’ learning
process that evolves throughout our lives (McDaniels & Gysbers, 1992). The
term also pertains to the interventions used by practitioners to facilitate
age- and situation-appropriate career behaviors across one’s lifetime (Herr,
2001; Jones, Dominguez, & Durodoye, 2011). In the Integrative Contextual
Model of Career Development, Lapan contends that both aspects of career

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

543

development need to be considered when preparing school-age youth to
creatively and proactively manage the signiﬁcant challenges they face.
School-age youth need to learn sets of skills and develop the types of
motivational styles and approaches that will assist them in their efforts to
establish satisfying life structures across their lifespans (Super, Savickas, &
Super, 1996).
The Integrative Contextual Model (ICM) of Career
Development: Tasks
At the heart of providing career development services to children and adolescents is the recognition of their need to develop more adaptive, resilient,
and proactive approaches to their present situations and possible future
career selves (Markus & Nurius, 1986). Lapan (2004) argued that youth are
more likely to develop such an approach to the present and future if they can
accomplish the following separate, but interrelated tasks: (a) develop positive
career-related self-efﬁcacy expectations and attributional styles; (b) form a
vocational identity by engaging in more self-directed career exploration and
planning activities, setting effective educational and career goals, and making a commitment to reach these goals; (c) learn effective social, prosocial,
and work readiness skills and behaviors; (d) construct a better understanding of self, the world of work, and how to best ﬁt in the work world;
(e) crystallize personally valued vocational interests; and (f) become empowered to achieve academically and become self-regulated learners. Although
these tasks are drawn from different theoretical perspectives, young people who accomplish them are hypothesized to gain adaptive advantages
as they enter a world of work characterized by rapid and unpredictable
changes (Savickas, 1995), a high demand for personal responsibility and
self-determination (Watts, 1996), and an expectation that people should be
both agentic and able to adapt ﬂexibly to new challenges without losing their
core identities (Flum & Blustein, 2000). These career development tasks are
detailed below.
Developing positive career-related self-efﬁcacy expectations and attributional styles.
Self-efﬁcacy expectations refer to ‘‘beliefs concerning one’s ability to successfully perform a given behavior’’ (Betz, 1994, p. 35). Self-efﬁcacy is
task-speciﬁc; in the context of this chapter, self-efﬁcacy refers to a person’s
belief that he or she can successfully engage in academic or career-related
tasks (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume). Self-efﬁcacy expectations have been
shown to be predictive of both academic and career outcomes among children and adolescents. For example, self-efﬁcacy has been associated with
subject matter interests and persistence in such subjects as math, science,

544

Career Development and Counseling

and English (Larose, Ratelle, Guay, Senecal, & Harvey, 2006; Lopez, Lent,
Brown, & Gore, 1997; Smith & Fouad, 1999). Self-efﬁcacy expectations have
been positively linked to intermediate career developmental tasks, such as
career planning and exploration, and to overcoming personal challenges
in academic and occupational settings (O’Brien, Dukstein, Jackson, Tomlinson, & Kamatuka, 1999; Turner & Conkel, 2010). Finally, self-efﬁcacy
expectations have been found to be correlated with the interests, aspirations,
outcome expectations, goals, career pursuits, and career trajectories of both
majority and minority youth (e.g., Alliman-Brissett & Turner, 2010; Bandura,
Barbaranelli, Vittorio-Caprara, & Pastorelli, 2001).
Research offers some clues about how to develop academic and careerrelated self-efﬁcacy beliefs in K–12 youth. Bandura (1997) suggested that selfefﬁcacy beliefs develop from four primary sources of information. The ﬁrst
and usually most potent source is personal performance accomplishments
(e.g., receiving an A in a math course will increase math self-efﬁcacy if
the young person understands that receiving the A is the result of his or
her own efforts). The other three sources of information are modeling or
vicarious learning (e.g., seeing someone of the same race and gender receive
an A in math will strengthen math efﬁcacy), social persuasion (e.g., being
complimented for math performance versus being ignored or belittled by
teachers, friends, or parents will strengthen math efﬁcacy), and physiological
arousal (e.g., heightened perceptions of one’s own anxiety while taking a
math test will make a student question his or her math abilities). These
four sources of self-efﬁcacy information have been found to relate to the
development of social (Anderson & Betz, 2001), academic (Usher & Pajares,
2006), math (Joet, Usher, & Bressoux, 2011), science (Britner, 2008), language
(Joet et al.), self-regulatory (Usher & Pajare), and career-related (Turner,
Alliman-Brissett, Lapan, Udipi, & Ergun, 2003) self-efﬁcacy. For example,
in the Turner et al. (2003) study, parents’ provision of efﬁcacy information
about each of the four source dimensions was positively related to four
important adolescent career development outcomes: (a) efﬁcacy to engage in
academic and career planning, (b) knowledge of self and others in career and
academic contexts, (c) understanding of the relationships between academic
achievement and occupational opportunities, and (d) early career decisionmaking. The results of this study led Turner et al. (2003) to recommend further
investigations into how extended families, teachers, and school and career
counselors can provide opportunities for adolescents to develop careerrelated self-efﬁcacy beliefs using Bandura’s schema to focus their efforts.
Research on attributional styles also offers potential implications for the
development of self-efﬁcacy and related psychological variables (Luzzo,
Funk, & Strang, 1996). Positive self-attributional styles refer to young people’s conﬁdence that their own skills, abilities, and efforts will determine

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

545

the bulk of their life experiences, including their educational and career
success. More speciﬁcally, people with positive attributional styles attribute
their successes to themselves, while people with negative attributional styles
attribute their failures to themselves. Positive attributional styles have been
shown to be related to decreases in perceptions of career barriers among
children and adolescents (Albert & Luzzo, 1999). Among high school adolescents, signiﬁcant positive relationships were found between optimistic
attributional styles and career maturity (i.e., vocationally mature attitudes,
behavior, and knowledge that characterize adaptive career development
during late adolescence and early adulthood) (Powell & Luzzo, 1998). In
another study of high school adolescents, relationships were found among
internal attributions for success, career planning and exploration, general
self-esteem, and school/academic self-esteem (Janeiro, 2010). Among African
American adolescents, positive self-attributions predicted work salience (i.e.,
the perceived importance of work), which in turn predicted career maturity (Naidoo, Bowman, & Gerstein, 1998). Among British ﬁnal-year school
leavers, self-attributions for employment success were found to relate to the
use of positive job search strategies (Furnham & Rawles, 1996).
One study examined the effects of attributional retraining on the selfattributions of college students (Luzzo, James, & Luna, 1996). After viewing
an eight-minute video presentation designed to foster internal, controllable
attributes for career decision making and to challenge faulty attributional
beliefs, experimental group participants displayed more positive career
beliefs and attributional styles, and exhibited signiﬁcantly more career
exploratory behaviors than did control group participants. Although this
type of training has not yet been evaluated among K–12 students, we
suggest that developmentally appropriate attributional style training may
positively affect the career development of this population as well.
Forming a vocational identity. Vocational identity refers to the integration and
crystallization of one’s energy, aptitudes, and opportunities into a consistent
sense of the uniqueness of one’s self and one’s ﬁt in the vocational world (see
Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume). An adolescent’s vocational identity will give
clarity and stability to her or his current and future career goals, and will
set the stage for her or his future career development. Vocational identity is
related to the concept of ego identity (Erikson, 1968) and is achieved through
the same cognitive processes as ego identity (i.e., exploration, observation,
reﬂection, and commitment). Vocational identity has been shown to be
clearly achieved before ideological, political, or religious identity (Skorikov &
Vondracek, 1998). This ﬁnding is indicative of the leading role that vocational
development plays in adolescent identity formation.

546

Career Development and Counseling

Signiﬁcant associations between vocational identity and many desirable
career outcomes in adolescents have been demonstrated. For example,
greater vocational identity clarity was related to the ability to identify and
surmount sociopolitical barriers among urban adolescents (Diemer & Blustein, 2006). Higher levels of vocational identity have been associated with
more congruent college major choices among gifted high school students
(Leung, 1998), and with greater career certainty and career choice commitment among high school adolescents (Ladany, Melincoff, Constantine, &
Love, 1997; Schulenberg, Vondracek, & Kim, 1993). The achievement of vocational identity in adolescents has further been associated with (a) strengthening and solidifying reality-based vocational aspirations (Sarriera, Silva,
Kabbas, & Lopes, 2001); (b) vocational choice orientation, planning about
preferred occupations, and formation of success-creating work attitudes
(Wallace-Broscious, Seraﬁca, & Osipow, 1994); and (c) positive mental health
indicators, including self-esteem and psychological adjustment (Munson,
1992; Skorikov & Moore, 2001).
Learning effective social, prosocial, and work readiness skills. Work readiness
skills are composed of general employability skills (e.g., the ability to accept
responsibility and make sound decisions), social competency skills (e.g., the
ability to appropriately initiate conversations and appropriately regulate
emotions), and prosocial skills (i.e., voluntary behavior intended to beneﬁt
another) (Lapan, 2004). Intuitively, one might think that learning these skills
is a natural function of the socialization process. Yet in today’s complex
world, with understaffed schools, ﬂuctuating economies, increasing family
and educational transitions, increased residential mobility, and increasing
demographic and cultural diversity, counselors concerned with the career
development of children and adolescents may need to take a deliberate and
proactive stance in the development of these career-related competencies.
Both career researchers and governmental policy makers have recommended a number of other work readiness skills (Bloch, 1996). For example,
the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 identiﬁed work readiness skills
believed to be necessary to the retraining of displaced workers. These skills
include maintaining regular attendance, being punctual, displaying positive
work attitudes and behaviors, completing tasks effectively, presenting an
appropriate appearance, and demonstrating good interpersonal relationship
skills. Lapan (2004) outlined a comprehensive set of skills to help children and
adolescents maximize their career potential. These are: (a) social competence
(i.e., the ability to build effective relationships), (b) diversity (i.e., the ability
and ﬂexibility to successfully interact with coworkers, clients, customers,
or students from different cultures), (c) positive work habits (including
sound judgment, responsibility, dependability, punctuality, attendance,

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

547

life planning and management skills, and recognition of and adherence
to the legal and ethical standards that govern one’s profession), (d) personal management skills (including positive self-attitudes, cleanliness,
appropriate dress, both verbal and nonverbal communication skills), and
(e) entrepreneurship (including leadership, creativity, desire, motivation,
and openness to opportunity). In sum, work readiness skills encompass a
diverse range of attitudes and skills, and include positive work habits and
attitudes (including punctuality and attendance, taking responsibility and
completing tasks effectively, demonstrating sound judgment and dressing
appropriately), social and prosocial competencies (including initiating
conversations, interacting successfully with diverse persons, regulating emotions, and building relationships), and entrepreneurship skills (including
taking on leadership roles and added responsibilities at work).
Research has shown that adult workers who possess adequate work
readiness skills experience greater work satisfaction (Meir, Melamed, &
Abu-Freha, 1990). Other investigators have found that greater work readiness
skills lead to more integration into the work environment (Ashford & Black,
1996), a stronger commitment to the organization in which one is employed
(Fisher, 1985), more successful job performance (Ashford & Black), fewer
job turnovers, and greater workplace rewards (Wanberg & KammeyerMueller, 2000).
A small body of literature suggests that work readiness skills can be developed within family and classroom environments. For example, Naimark and
Pearce (1985) hypothesized that children learn skills within the family that
can be transferred to the workplace, such as goal setting, decision making,
scheduling, budgeting, leading, nurturing, and communicating. Harkins
(2001) suggested that work readiness skills can be learned through direct
instruction and should be infused into the classroom curriculum. Munson and Rubenstein (1992) suggested that school personnel, such as school
counselors and career educators, are in an ideal position to contribute to a
student’s sense of work, work values, work habits, and work behaviors.
A more extensive body of literature suggests that work readiness skills can
also be developed through children’s friendships and peer group interactions. For example, researchers have shown that, within peer groups, children
have opportunities to learn (a) social skills, such as successfully exchanging
information, being clear in one’s communication with others, and engaging
in appropriate self-disclosure (Gottman, 1983), and (b) prosocial skills such
as empathy and treating others with justice and kindness (Youniss, 1980).
Gaining these social and prosocial skills can facilitate greater workplace
stamina and adjustment (Ladd & Kochenderfer, 1996) by promoting such
worker characteristics as stability, resilience, self-esteem, self-efﬁcacy,
and adaptability (Rigby & Slee, 1993). We maintain that psychologists,

548

Career Development and Counseling

counselors, and career educators can help shape children’s family, school,
and community contexts (e.g., facilitating peer groups in the community) in
ways that promote the growth of those critical work readiness skills that are
the foundation for a wide range of work readiness behaviors in adulthood
(Lapan, 2004).
Constructing a better understanding of oneself, the world of work, and one’s ﬁt in
the work world. Constructing a better understanding of oneself, the world
of work, and how one best ﬁts in the world of work has been the foundation of vocational psychology since Frank Parsons (1909) ﬁrst introduced
these concepts. Both career development researchers and counselors have
focused on helping career clients understand their abilities, interests, values,
and personality styles; the speciﬁcs of current labor market information;
and how to make better and more satisfying career decisions. However,
in the past several years, researchers have noted that children and adolescents experience special challenges in constructing their career pathways.
Three of these challenges, discussed in this section, are gender-based circumscription of vocational aspirations, career decision-making readiness, and
school-to-school/school-to-work transitioning.
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and Compromise (1981, 2002,
2005) has generated much research and has helped us better understand the
process of gender-based circumscription of vocational aspirations. These studies generally have shown that adolescents do indeed circumscribe their
vocational interests, self-efﬁcacy expectations, outcome expectations, and
prestige expectations according to their social valuation of occupations as
either gender appropriate or gender inappropriate (e.g., Lapan, Hinkelman,
Adams, & Turner, 1999). This process of circumscription (i.e., continual
narrowing of occupations that one will consider) and compromise (i.e., eliminating the most preferred options for less compatible ones) can result in
young people sacriﬁcing the fulﬁllment of their ‘‘internal unique selves’’
by choosing occupations that they perceive to be more socially acceptable
(Gottfredson, 2002). Circumscription of vocational aspirations has been
shown to begin in early childhood (Henderson, Hesketh, & Tufﬁn, 1988), with
children identifying segments of the occupational world as unattainable. The
process continues throughout middle and later adolescence during which
time adolescents make vocational preparation decisions that can affect their
ability to enter into more prestigious, lucrative, or congruent occupations
(Leung & Harmon, 1990; Mendez & Crawford, 2002). One of the most disturbing outcomes of the circumscription process is young women’s frequent
avoidance of the more highly paid and higher prestige math, science, and
technology-based careers (Lapan & Jingeleski, 1992).

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

549

However, research has shown that the process of circumscription can
be countered. In a study conducted with middle school students (Turner &
Lapan, 2005a), young people participated in constructing a map that reﬂected
their career interests, efﬁcacy concerning working in speciﬁc careers, and
gender-typing of careers in which they were both interested and not interested. Overall, constructing these maps demonstrated to participants that
they had greater interests and efﬁcacy for careers that they also believed
were more gender-appropriate for them. They then participated in group
discussions with their peers and a group leader that were intended to
increase their understanding of ways that women and men can enter into
and become successfully employed in gender-nontraditional careers. Results
indicated that young adolescents’ career-related self-efﬁcacy and interests in
non-traditional careers can be increased through participation in this type of
career intervention. Thus, helping young people understand how socialization has impacted their own views of acceptable careers, and helping them
to make informed choices that can counter those views, can be important
targets for career development interventions, especially during the years
before their occupational possibilities become substantially circumscribed
(see Gottfredson, 2005; Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
Career decision-making readiness represents the second challenge that many
adolescents face in constructing their career pathways. Piaget (1977) theorized that sometime during early adolescence (approximately at age 12),
young people undergo a fundamental shift in the way they view the world by
moving away from concrete thinking toward more abstract, logical thinking.
During this stage of cognitive development, adolescents begin to think more
scientiﬁcally, design and test multiple hypotheses, and manipulate objects,
operations, and future outcomes in their minds. Physical maturation, experience, and socialization allow young adolescents to envision not only what
they will be like in the future, but also how they will implement what they
conceive themselves to be.
Building on Piaget (1977) and Gottfredson (1981, 2005), information processing theorists have argued that cognitive development can be strongly
inﬂuenced and circumscription lessened through cognitive interventions
(e.g., information sharing, knowledge construction, learning critical thinking
skills; Case, 1991; Siegler, 1991). Career theorists who adhere to an information processing approach advocate sequential training in problem-solving as
a prerequisite to adolescent career decision-making (see Gottfredson, 2005
for a more complete discussion). For example, Sampson, Peterson, Lenz, and
Reardon (1992) proposed that adolescents be trained in the cycle of information processing skills used in career decision-making, which are: (a) problem
identiﬁcation, (b) analyzing the causes of the problem and the relationships
among the problem components, (c) synthesizing possible courses of action

550

Career Development and Counseling

through elaboration and crystallization, (d) evaluating each course of action,
and (e) implementing and executing a plan of action. Despite disagreement
in the research literature concerning when adolescents have the cognitive
maturity to make career decisions, there is general agreement about the
value of improving students’ problem-solving and career decision-making
competencies (Patton & Creed, 2001).
Helping children and adolescents know how best to ﬁt into the world
of work can also be accomplished through facilitating school-to-school and
school-to-work transitioning. Transitioning has been described as a prolonged
and increasingly complex process for young persons (Bynner, Chisholm,
& Furlong, 1997; Jones & Wallace, 1992). Transitioning is characterized for
many children by few institutional supports, the prolongation of education,
and a multitude of options that combine school, work, and family in unique
ways (Mortimer, Zimmer-Gembeck, Holmes, & Shanahan, 2002). Although
the literature is sparse in this area, research has shown that transitioning
can be accompanied by negative thoughts and emotions that may diminish
children’s and adolescents’ ability to achieve, explore, and plan at the level
of their abilities, especially for students who are already vulnerable.
For example, transitioning from grade school to junior high school has been
associated with decreases in self-esteem in ethnically diverse adolescents
living in poverty (Seidman, Lambert, Allen, & Aber, 2003). Transitioning
from primary to secondary school has been found to be accompanied by
fears of bullying, getting lost, increased workload, and more challenging peer
relationships (Zeedyk et al., 2003). Among young adults, the deployment
of maladaptive strategies, such as passive avoidance and external control
attributions (i.e., a sense that one’s personal destiny is controlled more
by others than by oneself), has been associated with increased difﬁculties
in dealing with school-to-work transitions (Maeaettae, Nurmi, & Majava,
2002). This avoidance behavior could arguably be said to begin in childhood,
which suggests that earlier interventions might provide young people with
the cognitive behavioral strategies to be more successful in their school-toschool and school-to-work transitioning.
Research and theory have suggested ways to help children and adolescents engage in school-to-school and school-to-work transitioning (Juntunen
& Wettersten, 2005). For example, Phillips, Blustein, Jobin-Davis, and
Finkelberg White (2002) argued that the use of resources in an adolescent’s
environment (e.g., supportive available adults, siblings, peers) can be associated with clearer transitional plans. Lapan, Tucker, Kim, and Kosciulek
(2003) found that the career development activities recommended by the
School-To-Work Opportunities Act—in particular, school-based learning,
work-based learning, connecting activities (e.g., job shadowing), and stakeholder support (e.g., from teachers, counselors, parents)—predicted grades,

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

551

interests, expectations, goals/actions, and person–environment ﬁt among
high school students. Shanahan, Mortimer, and Krueger (2002) proposed
that helping adolescents recognize connections between school and work
might assist them in preparing for school-to-work transitions. Worth (2002)
suggested that assisting adolescents to enhance their ﬂexibility in decision
making might help them to better adapt to more precarious employment situations and increase their opportunities in a quickly changing labor market.
Together, these studies suggest a number of activities that might promote
more successful school-to-school and school-to-work transitions among children and adolescents, including helping them to (a) marshal appropriate
support from their family, friends, and school environments; (b) engage in
school- and work-based learning opportunities that would help them appreciate the important connection between school achievement and later work
attainment, and (c) develop ﬂexible, but effective, decision-making skills.
Crystallizing personally valued vocational interests. Many theorists have highlighted the importance of interests in young people’s career development
(see earlier chapters in this volume). The foundation of career interests is
hypothesized to be based on genetic factors, accounting for about a third of
the variance in interests (Betsworth & Fouad, 1997), as well as such factors
as young people’s self-exploration activities, self-efﬁcacy expectations, and
outcome expectations (e.g., values) (see Nauta, Chapter 3, Hartung, Chapter
4, and Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
The crystallization of interests implies the formation of young people’s
career interests into a deﬁned and somewhat permanent structure. Career
interests begin to develop and become clariﬁed during the early high
school years and often crystallize at the point of educational and vocational
transitions (Mortimer et al., 2002). The crystallization of interests occurs
when adolescents recognize that they must make choices about how to ﬁt
into a complex world (Sharf, 2002). Crystallization requires adolescents to
weigh their values (for instance, choosing occupations that are altruistic,
or ones that are expressive of their personal moral views), clarify their
vocational goals, and begin to commit to occupational preparation. During
subsequent developmental stages, this initial commitment is reanalyzed,
with continuing reﬂection on the value of previous occupational choices
(Cochran, 1997).
Research has suggested that not all children and adolescents have the
opportunity to crystallize personally valued vocational interests. Social
forces, such as uneven educational opportunities, uneven environmental
supports, discrimination, and cultural and gender-based valuing of various careers (Gottfredson, 2005) may seriously hinder the crystallization of
personally valued interests. Indeed, recent research has shown that the value

552

Career Development and Counseling

systems underlying young people’s vocational interests are systematically
tied to social origin and early experiences, are highly inﬂuenced by the social
manifestations of race and gender, and change the most when adolescents
come to terms with the limits of their opportunities (Johnson, 2002). We
suggest that career counselors are in key positions to help all young people
crystallize personally valued interests by (a) designing strategies to help
them explore the underlying dimensions of their interests and expand their
awareness of vocational possibilities, and (b) working for community awareness, social justice, and advocacy for children and adolescents who may be
disadvantaged in the marketplace due to their race, socio-economic status,
or gender.
Empowering all students to achieve academically and become self-regulated learners.
Self-regulated learning is deﬁned as an active, constructive process whereby
learners set goals for their learning and then attempt to monitor, regulate,
and control their cognitions, motivations, and behaviors (Pintrich, 2000).
Zimmerman (2000) construed self-regulated learning as the monitoring of
one’s own planning, performance, and the expected and real outcomes of
any learning activity, whether interesting or uninteresting. Self-regulated
learning promotes both academic achievement and lifelong learning (Lapan,
Kardash, & Turner, 2002).
Research has shown that self-regulation promotes goal motivation and
direction (McWhaw & Abrami, 2001), effort intensity and task performance (Boekaerts, 1997), academic performance and achievement (Pintrich &
de Groot, 1990; Wolters, 1999), and positive self- and other-expectations
(Zimmerman, 2000). Further, schools, families, and communities can work
together to promote and enhance self-regulated learning among K–12
youth through identifying programs that effectively promote academic
achievement, instituting mutual accountability structures and practices, and
supporting the learning of children from different social contexts (Lapan &
Kosciulek, 2001).
The Integrative Contextual Model (ICM) of Career Development:
Motivations and Motivational Approaches
Motivations, such as hope or the desire for enjoyment, provide persons
with a reason to act in a certain way. Motivations are related to initiation,
persistence (Lapan, 2004), and production. Motivational approaches (i.e.,
those behaviors that are engaged in to satisfy one’s motivations) are both the
antecedents to and the consequences of the interrelationships between the
ICM skills and career outcomes, meaning that young people who have certain
motivations (e.g., hope) are more likely to engage in skill development and

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

553

that skill development and positive outcomes from this development serve
to further reinforce or increase their motivations. An example of this is seen
in a study (Sung, Turner, & Kaewchinda, in press) in which researchers
examined the relationships among hope, ICM skills, and outcomes. Results
showed that hope predicted both skills and outcomes, and that developing
skills and experiencing positive outcomes in turn predicted hope.
In addition to hope, other studies have found relationships among ICM
skills, motivational approaches, and career development outcomes, such as
proactivity, assertiveness, problem-solving orientation, awareness of opportunity, seeking opportunities, creating opportunities, capitalizing on skills
and abilities, active preparation, adaptability, and ﬂexibility (Turner, Conkel,
Starkey, & Landgraf, 2010). The next section summarizes the results of studies
investigating the usefulness of the ICM model to describe the career development of young people and a study on the effectiveness of an intervention
based on ICM.
Research on the Integrative Contextual Model
of Career Development
When examining the usefulness of the ICM model to describe the career
development of young people, researchers have deconstructed the ICM
career development tasks into a set of six interrelated career development skills (career exploration, person–environment ﬁt, goal setting, social/
prosocial/work readiness, self-regulated learning, and the utilization of
emotional and instrumental support) and six vocational outcomes (academic achievement, educational and career-related self-efﬁcacy expectations,
positive self-attributions, vocational interests, vocational identity, and proactivity). Tests of the model among Native American adolescents (Turner
et al., 2006) that was replicated in undergraduate college students (Sung
et al., in press) showed that ICM skills together predicted from 65% to 75%
of the variance in ﬁve of the six vocational outcomes (the exception was
academic achievement).
The ICM model has also been used to develop a career intervention. In
a pre-post study among multiethnic seventh- and eighth-grade students,
Turner and Conkel (2010) compared the ICM intervention, and a traditional
career counseling intervention to a no-treatment condition. The traditional
intervention consisted of students completing the Self-Directed Search
(Holland, 1997), participating in a discussion of individual results, and completing a structured protocol of occupational exploration activities based on
these results. They were then assisted by the researchers in considering the
pros and cons of working in their top choice career, and how aspects of
their vocational personalities matched with the occupational requirements

554

Career Development and Counseling

of this choice. Finally, they discussed how they could work toward the goal
of entering their top occupational choice, and how they could obtain the
required education for that occupation.
The ICM intervention was a combination of the traditional career counseling intervention, in which participants completed all of the activities
completed by students in the traditional intervention group, plus a set of
activities based on the ICM model. These additional activities were focused
on assisting students to develop skills related to (a) social/prosocial/work
readiness, (b) career exploration, (c) person–environment ﬁt, (d) goal setting, (e) self-regulated learning, and (f) garnering emotional and instrumental
support for overcoming educational and career barriers.
Results showed that only adolescents who participated in the combined
traditional and ICM intervention reported improved career development
outcomes in comparison to the control-group participants. Speciﬁcally,
students in the combined intervention condition reported greater
(a) person–environment ﬁt; (b) social, prosocial, and work readiness
skills; (c) efﬁcacy for reaching their career goals; and (d) emotional and
instrumental support than did control group participants who completed
no career development activities. There were no differences in reported
skills or outcomes between students who completed only the traditional
career counseling intervention and control group students.
Collectively, the results of these studies suggest that the ICM is useful
when describing the career development of young people and that interventions based on the ICM seem to be effective when used to increase career
development skills and outcomes among adolescents. Because research
based on the ICM model is still limited, more investigation of this model
and how it can be used to enhance young people’s career development is
necessary.
PROMOTING SCHOOL SUCCESS
In today’s global economy, school success is foundational to career development success. For example, research has shown that students who take
and pass a rigorous set of core courses in high school, in which they achieve
subject matter mastery, are more likely to achieve success in college than
students who take a less rigorous high school curriculum (for a review, see
American College Testing, 2010). Achieving academic success in the middle
school years seems to be related to achieving high school academic success
and to the types of educational and career aspirations that students report
when they graduate from high school. In fact, one large-scale study showed
that the educational and occupational aspirations that students reported in
eighth grade were the strongest predictors of these students’ twelfth-grade

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

555

educational and occupational aspirations (Rojewski & Yang, 1997). Even
more troubling was the ﬁnding that the best predictor of students’ eighthgrade aspirations was their academic performance in their elementary and
middle school years. This research, therefore, suggests that efforts to help
elementary and middle school students achieve academic success may have
long-term positive consequences on their later levels of academic success
and on their educational and career aspirations. Indeed, Lapan, Turner, and
Pierce (in press) suggested that the academic deﬁcits that students bring
with them into high school are not likely to be overcome unless they receive
substantial remediation while they are in the seventh and eighth grades.
Other research has shown that academic discipline (i.e., student effort
and conscientiousness), academic challenge, and having opportunities for
active and collaborative learning are all also related to high school academic achievement (Fuller, Wilson, & Tobin, 2011; Robbins, Allen, Casillas,
Peterson, & Le, 2006). Academic challenge and support seem to be especially
critical to school success. For example, in a 10-year longitudinal intervention
study designed to increase graduation rates, researchers found that achievement in both reading and math was related to teachers’ expectations and
the degree to which classes were challenging (i.e., more successful students
reported that their teachers had high expectations for them and challenged
them in class) (Mason-Chagil et al., 2011).
Parent support has also been shown to be important to school and career
success. Marjoribanks (2002) demonstrated that parents’ perceived aspirations for their adolescent children had medium to large associations with
their adolescents’ educational aspirations and small but signiﬁcant associations with their occupational aspirations. Smith and Hausafus (1998)
found that middle school minority students had higher test scores in math
when their parents helped them to see the importance of taking advanced
math courses, emphasized the importance of math for today’s careers,
and supported their children’s participation in extracurricular math/science
activities. Hoyt (2001) argued that young people do not necessarily understand the link between higher education and more lucrative employment
opportunities. Therefore, parents should be enlisted to help adolescents
explore a wide variety of educational options in order to choose those that
are best suited to their needs.
Research has also shown that academic achievement and school success
can be promoted by career development interventions, especially if career
interventions are intensive and integrated into the school curriculum, and
students receive more than one year of career services (Evans & Burck,
1992). Other research has found positive relations between diverse students’
level of involvement in career planning activities and school engagement
(Kenny, Blustein, Hasse, Jackson, & Perry, 2006), and one study found that

556

Career Development and Counseling

the relation between career planning activities and academic performance
among a diverse sample of urban high school students could be fully
explained by school engagement (Perry, Liu, & Pabian, 2010). Thus, career
development activities may promote academic success because students
who participate in these activities show more school involvement and
engagement than students who do not participate or who are not afforded
such opportunities.
One example of an intensive and integrated intervention was provided by
Lapan, Gysbers, Hughey, and Arni (1993). This joint program between school
counselors and language arts teachers was offered to 166 high school juniors.
School counselors presented extensive in-class career exploration exercises.
These included opportunities for adolescents to understand their own goals,
interests, personalities, and talents, to gather information about the world of
work through computer-assisted and other reference materials, and to reﬂect
upon how to create more career support from other students within their
immediate peer group. At the same time, the language arts teachers worked
with students on composing a research paper that addressed their post–high
school transition plans. After statistically controlling for prior academic
achievement, gains in the students’ career development competencies (e.g.,
career planning and exploration, understanding how being male or female
relates to jobs and careers, understanding how education and careers are
related) were signiﬁcantly associated with grades.
Other studies have shown that work-based learning and community/
career partnerships can support greater school success. Results of studies of
workplace learning activities suggest that those who participate in workplace
learning programs, versus those who do not, gain employment at higher
rates, obtain larger initial salaries, and show longer retention rates (U.S.
Department of Labor, 1996).
Community/career partnerships allow students as young as 15 years
old to hold part-time jobs during part of their school day while they are
under the supervision of both their career education instructor and their
employer. In the career education classes, students learn job and life skills
such as interviewing and job acquisition techniques (e.g., using labor market
information to ﬁnd jobs), how to manage personal resources (e.g., balancing a
checking account), and skills needed for self-sufﬁcient living (e.g., preparing
a budget). While at work, they practice the interpersonal skills, basic literacy
skills (e.g., writing, math, and English language skills), and job skills required
to become successful full-time employees. The results of the studies discussed
in this section of the chapter suggest that counselors providing career
services to K–12 clients in order to promote school success should carefully
plan interventions so that they incorporate and integrate both academic
and career development activities (e.g., Kenny et al., 2006), involve parents

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

557

whenever possible, connect to real-world work-related experiences, and
achieve support from community/career partnerships.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
In this chapter, we have examined how career development professionals can
assist K–12 youth to develop career awareness, acquire career development
strategies and skills, and experience school success. We have maintained that
career awareness is developmental and have suggested that to enhance career
awareness, young people should be (a) given developmentally appropriate
career information, (b) assisted in confronting gender biases at an early age,
(c) provided opportunities to participate in technology-enhanced mentoring,
and (d) introduced to specialized careers that require earlier planning and
educational attainment that begins in high school.
In the area of career development strategies and skills, we have reviewed
the Integrative Contextual Model (ICM) of Career Development (Lapan,
2004), and discussed emerging research that indicates that learning ICM skills
and developing speciﬁc, positive motivations and motivational approaches
can support young people’s career development success. Critical ICM skills
appear to be (a) developing positive career-related self-efﬁcacy beliefs and
attributional styles, (b) forming a vocational identity, (c) learning effective
social, prosocial, and work readiness skills and behaviors, (d) constructing
an understanding of the self, the world of work, and the ﬁt between the two,
(e) crystallizing personally valued vocational interests, and (f) becoming
empowered to achieve academically and engage in self-regulated learning.
In the area of promoting school success, we have demonstrated that both
academic and career development interventions are important in supporting
school achievement and that school achievement as early as junior high
school can have long-range ramiﬁcations on later academic and occupational
achievement. We suggest that career interventions should be consistently
and intentionally provided for all children and adolescents, according to
their individual needs and circumstances, and that incorporating support
from parents, encouraging teachers to challenge students, and engaging
in community/career partnerships are also important to fostering school
achievement via career development.
Finally, we hope that this chapter has acquainted the reader with some
of the positive results that career interventions can offer to children and
adolescents. Creating career awareness, supporting career development,
and promoting school success can be accomplished through providing
skillful and informed career services to school-age youth and can meaningfully assist them in establishing more satisfying, productive, and fulﬁlling
adult lives.

558

Career Development and Counseling

REFERENCES
Albert, K. A., & Luzzo, D. A. (1999). The role of perceived barriers in career
development: A social cognitive perspective. Journal of Counseling and Development,
77, 431–436.
Alliman-Brissett, A. E., & Turner, S. L. (2010). Racism, parent support, and
math-based career interests, efﬁcacy, and outcome expectations among African
American adolescents. Journal of Black Psychology, 36, 197–225.
American College Testing. (2010). Issues in college readiness: What are ACT’s college
readiness benchmarks? Retrieved from http://www.act.org/research/policymakers
/pdf/benchmarks.pdf
Anderson, S. L., & Betz, N. E. (2001). Sources of social self-efﬁcacy expectations: Their
measurement and relation to career development. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
58, 98–117.
Ashford, S. J., & Black, J. S. (1996). Proactivity during organizational entry: The role
of desire for control. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 199–214.
Balogun, J. A., Sloan, P. E., & Hardney, K. (2005). Health professions career awareness
program for seventh- and eighth-grade African-American students: A pilot study.
Journal of Allied Health, 34, 236–243.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman/
Times Books/Henry Holt.
Bandura, A. Barbaranelli, C., Vittorio-Caprara, G., & Pastorelli, C. (2001). Selfefﬁcacy beliefs as shapers of children’s aspirations and career trajectories. Child
Development, 72, 187–206.
Beale, A. V. (2000). Elementary school career awareness: A visit to a hospital. Journal
of Career Development, 27, 65–72.
Betsworth, D. G., & Fouad, N. A. (1997). Vocational interests: A look at the past
70 years and a glance at the future. Career Development Quarterly, 46, 23–47.
Betz, N. E. (1994). Basic issues and concepts in career counseling for women. In B. W.
Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Career counseling for women: Contemporary topics in
vocational psychology (pp. 1–41). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bloch, D. T. (1996). Career development and workforce preparation: Educational
policy versus school practice. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 20–40.
Boekaerts, M. (1997). Self-regulated learning: A new concept embraced by
researchers, policy makers, educators, teachers, and students. Learning &
Instruction, 7, 161–186.
Britner, S. L. (2008). Motivation in high school science students: A comparison of
gender differences in life, physical, and earth science classes. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 45, 955–970.
Bynner, J., Chisholm, L., & Furlong, A. (1997). Youth, citizenship, and social change in
a European context. Brookﬁeld, VT: Ashgate.
Case, R. (1991). The mind’s staircase: Exploring the conceptual underpinnings of children’s
thought and knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cochran, L. (1997). Career counseling: A narrative approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Diemer, M. A., & Blustein, D. L. (2006). Critical consciousness and career development among urban youth. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 68, 220–232.

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

559

Erikson, E. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: W. W. Norton.
Evans, J. H., & Burck, H. D. (1992). The effects of career education interventions on
academic achievement: A meta-analysis. Journal of Counseling & Development, 71,
63–68.
Fisher, C. D. (1985). Social support and adjustment to work: A longitudinal study.
Journal of Management, 11, 39–53.
Flum, H., & Blustein, D. L. (2000). Reinvigorating the study of vocational exploration:
A framework for research. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56, 380–404.
Fuller, M. B., Wilson, M. A., & Tobin, R. M. (2011). The National Survey of
Student Engagement as a predictor of undergraduate GPA: A cross-sectional
and longitudinal examination. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 36,
735–748.
Furnham, A., & Rawles, R. (1996). Job search strategies, attitudes to school and
attributions about unemployment. Journal of Adolescence, 19, 355–369.
Ginzberg, E., Ginsburg, S. W., Axelrad, S., & Herma, J. L. (1950). The problem of
occupational choice. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 20, 166–201.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1981). Circumscription and compromise: A developmental theory
of occupational aspirations. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 28, 545–579.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2002). Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription, compromise, and
self-creation. In D. Brown (Ed.), Career choice and development (4th ed., pp. 85–148).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2005). Applying Gottfredson’s theory of circumscription and
compromise in career guidance and counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.),
Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 71–100).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gottman, J. M. (1983). How children become friends. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development [No. 201], 48, 86.
Harkins, M. A. (2001). Developmentally appropriate career guidance: Building
concepts to last a lifetime. Early Childhood Education Journal, 28, 169–174.
Henderson, S., Hesketh, B., & Tufﬁn, K. (1988). A test of Gottfredson’s theory of
circumscription. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 32, 37–48.
Herr, E. L. (2001). The impact of national policies, economics and school reform on
comprehensive guidance programs. Professional School Counseling, 4, 236–245.
Hill, J. M. M. (1969). The transition from school to work: A study of the child’s changing
perception of work from the age of seven. London, UK: Tavistock Institute of Human
Relations.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hoyt, K. B. (2001). Helping high school students broaden their knowledge of
postsecondary education options. Professional School Counseling, 5, 6–12.
Janeiro, I. N. (2010). Motivational dynamics in the development of career attitudes
among adolescents. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76, 170–177.
Joet, G., Usher, E. L., & Bressoux, P. (2011). Sources of self-efﬁcacy: An investigation
of elementary school students in France. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103,
649–663.

560

Career Development and Counseling

Johnson, M. K. (2002). Social origins, adolescent experiences, and work value
trajectories during the transition to adulthood. Social Forces, 80, 1307–1341.
Jones, B., Dominguez, C. S., & Durodoye, B. (2011). Career maturity and ethnically
diverse high school students. Career Convergence Web Magazine. Retrieved
from http://associationdatabase.com/aws/NCDA/pt/sd/news_article/5522
/_PARENT/layout_details_cc/false
Jonesa, G., & Wallace, C. (1992). Youth, family and citizenship. Buckingham, UK: Open
University Press.
Juntunen, C. L., & Wettersten, K. B. (2005). Broadening our understanding of
work-bound youth: A challenge for career counseling. In S. D. Brown, & R. W.
Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to work
(pp. 573–599). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Kenny, M. E., Blustein, D. L., Haase, R. F., Jackson, J., & Perry, J. C. (2006). Setting
the stage: Career development and the student engagement process. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 53, 272–279.
Ladany, N., Melincoff, D. S., Constantine, M. G., & Love, R. (1997). At-risk urban
high school students’ commitment to career choices. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 76, 45–52.
Ladd, G. W., & Kochenderfer, B. J. (1996). Linkages between friendship and adjustment during early school transitions. In W. M. Bukowski, A. F. Newcomb, &
W. W. Hartup (Eds.), The company they keep: Friendship in childhood and adolescence.
Cambridge studies in social and emotional development (pp. 322–345). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Lane Workforce Partnership. (2011). Youth awareness of middle skill jobs. Retrieved
from http://laneworkforce.org/youth-services/youth-career-awareness-task-force
/youth-career-awareness-task-force-survey-results/
Lapan, R. T. (2004). Career development across the K–16 years: Bridging the present to
satisfying and successful futures. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Lapan, R. T., Gysbers, N., Hughey, K., & Arni, T. J. (1993). Evaluating a guidance
and language arts unit for high school juniors. Journal of Counseling & Development,
71, 444–451.
Lapan, R. T., Hinkelman, J. M., Adams, A., & Turner, S. (1999). Understanding
rural adolescents’ interests, values, and efﬁcacy expectations. Journal of Career
Development, 26, 107–124.
Lapan, R. T., & Jingeleski, J. (1992). Circumscribing vocational aspirations in junior
high school. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 39, 81–90.
Lapan, R. T., Kardash, C. A. M., & Turner, S. (2002). Empowering students to become
self-regulated learners. Professional School Counseling, 5, 257–265.
Lapan, R. T., & Kosciulek, J. F. (2001). Toward a community career system program
evaluation framework. Journal of Counseling & Development, 79, 3–15.
Lapan, R. T., Tucker, B., Kim, S., & Kosciulek, J. F. (2003). Preparing rural adolescents
for post high-school transitions. Journal of Counseling and Development, 81, 329–342.
Lapan, R. T., Turner, S. L., & Pierce, M. E. (in press). College and career readiness:
Policy and research to support effective counseling in schools. In N. A. Fouad, J. A.
Carter, & L. M. Subich (Eds.), APA handbook of counseling psychology. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

561

Larose, S., Ratelle, C. F., Guay, F., Senecal, C., & Harvey, M. (2006). Trajectories
of science self-efﬁcacy beliefs during the college transition and academic and
vocational adjustment in science and technology programs. Educational Research
and Evaluation, 12, 373–393.
Leung, S. A. (1998). Vocational identity and career choice congruence of gifted and
talented high school students. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 11, 325–335.
Leung, S. A., & Harmon, L. W. (1990). Individual and sex differences in the zone of
acceptable alternatives. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 37, 153–159.
Li, Q., Moorman, L., & Dyjur, P. (2010). Inquiry-based learning and e-mentoring via
videoconference: A study of mathematics and science learning of Canadian rural
students. Education Technology, Research, and Development, 58, 729–753.
Lopez, F. G., Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Gore, P. A. (1997). Role of socialcognitive expectations in high school students’ mathematics-related interest and
performance. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 44, 44–52.
Luzzo, D. A., Funk, D. P., & Strang, J. (1996). Attributional retraining increases career
decision-making self-efﬁcacy. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 378–386.
Luzzo, D. A., James, T., & Luna, M. (1996). Effects of attributional retraining on
the career beliefs and career exploration behavior of college students. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 43, 415–422.
Maeaettae, S., Nurmi, J. E., & Majava, E. M. (2002). Young adults’ achievement and
attributional strategies in the transition from school to work: Antecedents and
consequences. European Journal of Personality, 16, 295–312.
Marjoribanks, K. (2002). Family contexts, individual characteristics, proximal settings, and adolescents’ aspirations. Psychological Reports, 91(3, Pt1), 769–779.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41, 954–969.
Mason-Chagil, G., Turner, S. L., Pabon, M., Conkel, J. L., Joeng, J., Landgraf, R., . . .
Dade, S. N. (2011). Bush high school completion program. Unpublished report, Bush
Foundation, Minneapolis, MN.
McDaniels, C., & Gysbers, N. C. (1992). Counseling for career development: Theories,
resources, and practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
McMahon, M., & Watson, M. (2006). Occupational information: What children want
to know. GIPO Giornale Italiano Di Psicologia Dell’Orientamento, 7(3), 41–46.
McWhaw, K., & Abrami, P. C. (2001). Student goal orientation and interest: Effects
on students’ use of self-regulated learning strategies. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 26, 311–329.
Meir, E. I., Melamed, S., & Abu-Freha, A. (1990). Vocational, avocational, and skill
utilization congruences and their relationship with well-being in two cultures.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 36, 153–165.
Mendez, L. M. R., & Crawford, K. M. (2002). Gender-role stereotyping and career
aspirations: A comparison of gifted early adolescent boys and girls. Journal of
Secondary Gifted Education, 13, 96–107.
Mortimer, J. T., Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., Holmes, M., & Shanahan, M. J. (2002).
The process of occupational decision making: Patterns during the transition to
adulthood. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61, 439–465.
Munson, H. L., & Rubenstein, B. J. (1992). School IS work: Work task learning in the
classroom. Journal of Career Development, 18, 289–297.

562

Career Development and Counseling

Munson, W. W. (1992). Self-esteem, vocational identity, and career salience in high
school students. Career Development Quarterly, 40, 361–368.
Naidoo, A. V., Bowman, S. L., & Gerstein, L. H. (1998). Demographics, causality,
work salience, and the career maturity of African-American students: A causal
model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 53, 15–27.
Naimark, H., & Pearce, S. (1985). Transferable skills: One link between work and
family. Journal of Career Development, 12, 48–54.
O’Brien, K. M., Dukstein, R. D., Jackson, S. L., Tomlinson, M. J., & Kamatuka, N. A.
(1999). Broadening career horizons for students in at-risk environments. Career
Development Quarterly, 47, 215–229.
Parsons, F. (1909). Choosing a vocation. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Patton, W., & Creed, P. A. (2001). Developmental issues in career maturity and
career decision status. Career Development Quarterly, 49, 336–351.
Perry, J. C., Liu, X., & Pabian, Y. (2010). School engagement as a mediator of academic
performance among urban youth: The role of career preparation, parental career
support, and teacher support. Counseling Psychologist, 38, 269–295.
Phillips, S. D., Blustein, D. L., Jobin-Davis, K., & Finkelberg White, S. (2002).
Preparations for the school-to-work transition: The views of high school students.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61, 202–216.
Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. New
York, NY: Viking.
Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In
M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation
(pp. 452–502). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Pintrich, P. R., & de Groot, E. V. (1990). Motivational and self-regulated learning
components of classroom academic performance. Journal of Educational Psychology,
82, 33–40.
Powell, D. F., & Luzzo, D. A. (1998). Evaluating factors associated with the career
maturity of high school students. Career Development Quarterly, 47, 145–158.
Prime, D. R., Nota, L., Ferrari, L., Schultheiss, D. E. P., Soresi, S., & Tracey,
T. J. G. (2010). Correspondence of children’s anticipated vocations, perceived
competencies, and interests: Results from an Italian sample. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 77, 58–62.
Rigby, K., & Slee, P. T. (1993). Dimensions of interpersonal relations among Australian school children and their implications for psychological well-being. Journal
of Social Psychology, 133, 33–42.
Robbins, S. B., Allen, J., Casillas, A., Peterson, C. H., & Le, H. (2006). Unraveling
the differential effects of motivational and skills, social, and self-management
measures from traditional predictors of college outcomes. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 98, 598–616.
Rojewski, J. W., & Yang, B. (1997). Longitudinal analysis of select inﬂuences on
adolescent occupational aspirations. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 51, 375–410.
Sampson, J. P., Peterson, G. W., Lenz, J., & Reardon, R. C. (1992). A cognitive
approach to career services: Translating concepts into practice. Career Development
Quarterly, 41, 67–74.

Promotion of Career Awareness, Development, and School Success

563

Sarriera, J. C., Silva, M. A., Kabbas, C. P., & Lopes, V. B. (2001). Occupational identity
formation in adolescents. Estudos de Psicologia, 6, 27–32.
Savickas, M. L. (1995). Current theoretical issues in vocational psychology: Convergence, divergence, and schism. In W. B. Walsh & S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Handbook of
vocational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 1–34). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schulenberg, J., Vondracek, F. W., & Kim, J. (1993). Career certainty and short-term
changes in work values during adolescence. Career Development Quarterly, 41,
268–284.
Seidman, E., Lambert, L. E., Allen, L., & Aber, J. L. (2003). Urban adolescents’
transition to junior high school and protective family transactions. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 23, 166–193.
Shanahan, M. J., Mortimer, J. T., & Krueger, H. (2002). Adolescence and adult work
in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 12, 99–120.
Sharf, R. S. (2002). Applying career development theory to counseling (3rd ed.). Belmont,
CA: Brooks/Cole.
Siegler, R. S. (1991). Children’s thinking. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Skorikov, V. B., & Moore, S. (2001, August). Relationships between career development
and mental health: Implications of research. Paper presented at the 109th annual
convention of the American Psychological Association, San Francisco, CA.
Skorikov, V., & Vondracek, F. W. (1998). Vocational identity development: Its
relationship to other identity domains and to overall identity development.
Journal of Career Assessment, 6, 13–35.
Smith, F. M., & Hausafus, C. O. (1998). Relationship of family support and ethnic
minority students’ achievement in science and mathematics. Science Education, 82,
111–125.
Smith, P. L., & Fouad, N. A. (1999). Subject-matter speciﬁcity of self-efﬁcacy,
outcome expectancies, interests, and goals: Implications for the social-cognitive
model. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 461–471.
Sung, Y., Turner, S. L., & Kaewchinda, M. (in press). Career development skills,
outcomes, and hope among college students.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown, L. Brooks, & Associates (Eds.), Career choice and development
(3rd ed., pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Turner, S. L., Alliman-Brissett, A. E., Lapan, R. T., Udipi, S., & Ergun, D. (2003). The
Career-Related Parent Support Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling
and Development, 36, 83–94.
Turner, S. L., & Conkel, J. L. (2010). Evaluation of a career development skills
intervention with adolescents living in an inner city. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 88, 457–465.
Turner, S. L., Conkel, J., Starkey, M., & Landgraf, R. (2010). Relationships among middle school adolescents’ vocational skills, motivational approaches, and interests.
Career Development Quarterly, 59, 154–168.
Turner, S. L., & Lapan, R. T. (2005a). Evaluation of an intervention to increase
adolescents’ efﬁcacy and interests in non-traditional careers. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 66, 516–531.

564

Career Development and Counseling

Turner, S. L., & Lapan, R. T. (2005b). Promoting career development and aspirations
in school-age youth. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and
counseling: Putting theory and research to work (pp. 417–440). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Turner, S. L., Trotter, M. J., Lapan, R. T., Czajka, K. A., Yang, P., & Brissett, A. E.
(2006). Vocational skills and outcomes among Native American adolescents: A test
of the Integrative Contextual Model of Career Development. Career Development
Quarterly, 54, 216–226.
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. (1996).
Involving employers in training: Best practices. Retrieved from http://wdr.doleta
.gov/opr/fulltext/97-practices.pdf
Usher, E. L., & Pajares, F. (2006). Sources of academic and self-regulatory efﬁcacy
beliefs of entering middle school students. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
31, 125–141.
Wallace-Broscious, A., Seraﬁca, F. C., & Osipow, S. H. (1994). Adolescent career
development: Relationships to self-concept and identity status. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 4, 127–149.
Wanberg, C. R., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D. (2000). Predictors and outcomes of
proactivity in the socialization process. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 373–385.
Watts, A. G. (1996). Toward a policy for lifelong career development: A transatlantic
perspective. Career Development Quarterly, 45, 41–53.
Whiston, S. C., & Brecheisen, B. K. (2002). Practice and research in career counseling
and development–2001. Career Development Quarterly, 51, 98–154.
Wolters, C. A. (1999). The relation between high school students’ motivational
regulation and their use of learning strategies, effort, and classroom performance.
Learning & Individual Differences, 11, 281–299.
Worth, S. (2002). Education and employability: School leavers’ attitudes to the
prospect of non-standard work. Journal of Education & Work, 15, 163–180.
Youniss, J. (1980). Parents and peers in social development. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Zeedyk, M. S., Gallacher, J., Henderson, M., Hope, G., Husband, B., & Lindsay, K.
(2003). Negotiating the transition from primary to secondary school: Perceptions
of pupils, parents and teachers. School Psychology International, 24, 67–79.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective.
In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation
(pp. 13–39). New York, NY: Academic Press.

C H A P T E R 20

Promotion of Career Choices
SUSAN C. WHISTON AND BARBARA NOBLIN JAMES

A

S MILLER AND BROWN (2005) wrote, most individuals in developed coun-

tries at some time during their lives either make or remake decisions
about work. Career choice or decision making is often the focus of
career counseling: The counselor helps an individual or group of individuals decide on a career path and make academic decisions related to that
choice, to select types of occupations to pursue, to decide whether to leave
one occupational ﬁeld and pursue another, or to make other work-related
decisions. Various environmental and contextual factors can impede career
development and the career choice process; therefore, it is important that
counselors know about strategies to promote the career choices. This chapter
is based on more than 50 years of research related to career counseling in
which the goal is to help individuals choose or decide on a career path.
Our aim with this chapter is to summarize this research with the intent
of providing practical suggestions for practitioners who are working with
clients who are struggling with career choices and decisions.
In a chapter on the promotion of career choice interventions, it is ﬁrst
important to deﬁne what is meant by both promotion and career choice.
We deﬁne career choice very broadly to include decisions that are made
throughout the life span, and our discussion includes both proximal and
distal factors related to career choice. Following the lead of Ryan (1999),
we suggest that career choice consists of intentions, plans, or aspirations
related to engaging in a career direction and that proximal measures are
indices of career certainty, decidedness, or commitment. We further view
career choice as a process and suggest that there are also distal factors that
contribute to career choice. Ryan labeled these as intermediate outcome variables and contended that a number of theoretically derived factors ultimately
inﬂuence career choice, such as vocational identity and congruence (from
565

566

Career Development and Counseling

person–environment ﬁt approaches), career maturity (from developmental
approaches), and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy, perceived environmental supports, and perceived career choice barriers (from social cognitive
career approaches) (see, respectively, Chapters 3, 4, and 5, this volume).
Therefore, in our summary of activities that promote career choice, we have
included both proximal and distal measures of outcome.
Concerning the term promotion, we have primarily focused on interventions
or activities counselors or clinicians can implement that promote or facilitate
career choice or career choice-related outcomes. In this focus on interventions, we do not intend to dismiss the aspects of society (e.g., educational
systems) that either promote or stiﬂe career choice; however, the audience
for this book is practitioners. Therefore, we address what clinicians can do
to facilitate career choice. This clinical focus is based on a growing body of
research that provides insight into speciﬁc types of interventions found to
facilitate career choice, which ultimately results in people selecting occupations that optimize their chances of being successful in and satisﬁed with
their work.
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAREER CHOICE INTERVENTIONS
Meta-analytic studies are often used to determine the effectiveness of psychological and educational interventions because meta-analyses combine
the results from many individual studies quantitatively and yield an overall
index of the magnitude of the effects of the intervention (often called an effect
size). The most common effect size used in counseling outcome research is
the standardized mean difference effect size. This effect size index can be
interpreted as how far one group’s mean (e.g., the counseled group) fell from
the other group’s mean (e.g., a control group who received no counseling).
Thus, for example, an effect size of 1.00 suggests that the counseled clients
improved a standard deviation more than control clients, whereas an effect
size of 0.00 means that there was no difference between the two groups.
Obviously, the larger the effect size, the stronger the treatment effect. Cohen
(1988) provided some guidelines with which to interpret effect sizes, suggesting that effect sizes of .20, .50, and .80 represent small, medium, and
large effects, respectively. In career counseling, a number of meta-analyses
(e.g., Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000; Oliver & Spokane, 1988; Spokane & Oliver,
1983; Whiston, Sexton, & Lasoff, 1998) have examined whether those who
received a career intervention fare better on outcome measures than those
who did not receive any type of career intervention. Of these meta-analyses,
Brown and Ryan Krane’s (2000) study is the only one that examined the
effectiveness of career counseling interventions speciﬁcally on measures of

Promotion of Career Choices

567

career choice. Brown and Ryan Krane’s study was an extension of Ryan’s
(1999) series of meta-analyses, which provide unique insight into the overall
effectiveness of career choice-related interventions. Using a sophisticated
weighting system to calculate effect size, Brown and Ryan Krane (2000)
found that career choice interventions had an average effect size of .34. This
means that those who received the career choice intervention improved on
the outcome measures about one-third of a standard deviation more than
those who did not receive the intervention. Whiston and colleagues (1998)
did not limit their meta-analysis to career choice-related outcomes; however,
they did calculate separate average effect sizes based on categories of outcome measure. They found a sufﬁcient number of studies to calculate effect
sizes for two outcomes related to career choice (i.e., level of decidedness and
career maturity). Whiston and colleagues found an average effect size of .19
for decidedness and .55 for career maturity. Using Cohen’s (1988) commonly
used method, the effect sizes for career choice interventions found by Brown
and Ryan Krane and Whiston and colleagues would range from small to
moderate. Brown and Ryan Krane, however, found that the magnitude of
the effect sizes varied depending on the types of interventions that were
used to facilitate career choice.
Although the ﬁndings regarding overall effect sizes for career counseling
interventions that promote career choice are somewhat mixed, there is a
growing body of literature indicating that certain interventions can have
long-terms effects. For example, Hirschi and Läge (2008) found that Swiss
middle school students who received a 2-day, nine-module career intervention had higher scores in terms of both career exploration and vocational
identity than the control group 3 months after completing the interventions.
Also with Swiss clients, Perdrix, Stauffer, Masdonati, Massoudi, and Rossier
(2012) examined the effectiveness of four to ﬁve sessions of career counseling
based on work adjustment theory (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this
volume) and social cognitive career theory (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume)
at a 3-month and 1-year follow-up. They found that the majority of clients
followed an implementation path (64%), meaning that most clients had implemented the career project developed during counseling within a year after
completing career counseling. Further, Perdrix and colleagues found that
increases in life satisfaction evident immediately after counseling remained
stable for a year after treatment and that career decision-making difﬁculties
showed a continual decline during the year. Finally, Lapan, Aoyagi, and
Kayson (2007) found that enhanced career development in high school was
signiﬁcantly connected to more successful career transitions and to greater
satisfaction with life 3 years after graduation from high school.

568

Career Development and Counseling

FACTORS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO EFFECTIVENESS
For practitioners, it is not enough to know that career choice interventions are,
on average, moderately effective and that their effects appear to be sustained
over time. Practitioners need also to understand factors that contribute to
effectiveness so that they can consider these when choosing strategies to
help clients with career choice difﬁculties. For this reason, we dedicate the
largest portion of this chapter to summarizing factors that have emerged
as salient to the creation of effective career choice interventions with the
caveat that this list is ever growing and that future research is needed to
ﬂesh out and add to this list. We cover here the following factors: client
preferences, dose effects, critical ingredients, process factors, modalities, and
client factors. Before beginning these sections, however, note that much of
this research has been conducted with college students. As an example,
Whiston (2002) found that of the studies published between 1950 and 1996
that compared a career counseling intervention to a control group, 49% of
the studies were conducted with a college-age sample.
Client Preferences
In terms of their preferences before seeking career counseling, Galassi,
Crace, Martin, James, and Wallace (1992) found that college students prefer
to talk about speciﬁc careers or decision making, explore careers in general,
explore self, and gain new information about careers and majors. These
clients, however, anticipated that the career counseling would primarily
involve exploring self and taking tests. Shivy and Koehly (2002) found
that college students prefer career services involving direct interaction with
employed individuals, such as participation in an internship experience, the
opportunity to interview people at their worksite, or attending a career fair.
In developing a measure to assess clients’ attitudes toward career counseling, Rochlen, Mohr, and Hargrove (1999) found that male college students
were more likely to report a higher stigma attached to career counseling
than female college students. In contrast, Shivy and Koehly (2002) found
college students’ perceptions of, and preference for, career services did not
vary based on gender. In examining why male college students would or
would not seek career counseling, Rochlen and O’Brien (2002a) found that
males would seek career counseling to receive direct advice, general career
assistance, and help with job placement, as well as to increase career options;
their reasons for not seeking career counseling were inconvenience, preferences for solving problems without assistance from others, a lack of need
(i.e., already decided), and doubts about the potential utility of the service.
Therefore, these studies tended to indicate that men prefer career counseling
that involves a more directive, advice-giving style and a reluctance to become

Promotion of Career Choices

569

involved in a process that involves self-exploration. This is consistent with
Rochlen and O’Brien’s (2002b) ﬁndings that after viewing two videotaped
career counseling sessions, men tended to prefer a more directive approach
to career counseling over a more contextual, emotionally oriented approach.
What is noteworthy is that more recent research has tended to focus on
the preferences of men and that clinicians have less information related to
women’s career counseling preferences.
In addition, two recent studies have explored whether individuals’ expectations and attitudes toward career counseling can be changed based on
some type of role induction. Fouad and colleagues (2007) compared two role
induction protocols—one focusing on the holistic nature of career counseling
and the other offering a very narrow deﬁnition of career counseling—versus
a no role induction control group. They found very few differences among the
three conditions. Conversely, Whitaker, Phillips, and Tokar (2004) hypothesized that people often believe the role of the career counselor is to inform
them of what they ‘‘should be.’’ These researchers tested whether viewing
a video of an initial session in which the counselor focused on the client’s
involvement in the process and the counselor’s role as a guide through
the process would affect expectations of career counseling. Whitaker and
colleagues found that those who viewed the preparatory video as compared
to a nonpreparatory video reported higher levels of personal commitment to
career counseling and viewed the counselor as less of an expert who would
inform them of their career direction than as a guide who would help them
through the process of deciding. Particularly with career counseling that
focuses on career choice, it may be important for practitioners to consider
some form of role induction, which encourages client participation and
clearly articulates the role of the counselor as a guide through the process
and not as an authority on the client’s future career direction.
Dose Effect
Analogous to medical or pharmaceutical research, where the interest is on
how much of the prescribed treatment is necessary, the area in intervention
research that examines the number of sessions or the length of the treatment
is often called the dose effect. In Oliver and Spokane’s (1988) meta-analysis,
the only signiﬁcant predictor of effect size was treatment intensity (number
of hours and number of sessions entered as a block). In plotting the number
of sessions by outcome, Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) found an interesting
relationship between effect size and number of sessions. They found an effect
size (ES) of .24 with one session, an ES = .47 for two to three sessions, and
an ES = 1.26 for four to ﬁve sessions; however, the effect sizes precipitously
decreased after four to ﬁve sessions. These results led Brown and Ryan Krane

570

Career Development and Counseling

to conclude that career choice counseling can probably best be implemented
in four to ﬁve sessions. However, Brown and Ryan Krane found that it
was not simply the number of sessions that inﬂuenced outcome; what
mattered most was whether certain ingredients were contained in the career
choice counseling.
Critical Ingredients
Ryan (1999) proposed that although past meta-analyses (Oliver & Spokane,
1988; Whiston et al., 1998) were helpful in determining the overall effectiveness of career counseling interventions and in beginning to identify
variables that underlie effectiveness, further investigation was warranted to
tease out the processes that are involved in effective career choice counseling interventions. Stated more speciﬁcally, she sought to determine what
was actually happening in effective career choice counseling sessions. Her
series of meta-analyses yielded the identiﬁcation of ﬁve broad categories of
interventions that were present in and associated with higher effect sizes on
measures of career choice outcomes (most often in career maturity). These
interventions yielded larger effect sizes beyond what could be accounted for
by client, modality, treatment intensity, therapist, or method variables.
These ﬁve broad categories were later labeled the ‘‘critical ingredients’’ of
career choice counseling by Brown and Ryan Krane (2000). Brown and Ryan
Krane found not only that they seemed to be individually important to at least
one career choice outcome but also that combinations of them yielded larger
effect sizes than did any one individually. They found that interventions
that included none of the critical ingredients resulted in an effect size of
only .22, whereas adding one, two, and three of the critical ingredients
resulted in effect sizes of .45, .61, and .99, respectively. Because none of
the studies involved in the meta-analyses employed more than three of the
critical ingredients, it was not possible for them to determine the aggregate
effect size of the use of all ﬁve together. However, Brown and colleagues
(2003) were able to verify that the linear pattern created by the addition of
each component was not due to the alternative explanation that ‘‘more of
anything’’ is better. They found, in fact, random combinations of the ﬁve
noncritical ingredients produced either ﬂat or no relationship at all to effect
size, which is in stark contrast to the linear model produced by the addition
of each of the critical ingredients.
The following is a brief description of the ﬁve critical ingredients:
workbook/written exercises, counselor–client dialogue (later called ‘‘interpretations and feedback’’), information about the world of work, modeling,
and increasing environmental supports. These ﬁve critical ingredients

Promotion of Career Choices

571

provide the foundation for evidence-based career choice interventions and
speak directly to what practitioners can do to help clients in choosing or
rechoosing careers.
Workbook/written exercises. The workbook activities that were effective
ranged from sentence completion to journaling and included prescribed
activities completed by clients in booklets, as well as personal logs
and diaries. Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) reported that this group of
interventions has the goal of getting clients to reﬂect on their own thoughts,
concerns, questions, or curiosities related to their personal career development while helping clients to establish and plan activities toward meeting
career goals. Brown and colleagues (2003) found that larger effect sizes
were associated with written exercises that included two notable activities:
(1) opportunities for written occupational analysis and comparison and
(2) an opportunity to engage in goal setting and future planning at the end
of the intervention. This critical ingredient involved in getting clients to
physically write down information related to their career search is consistent
with instructional effectiveness research, which indicates that written note
taking, homework, and summarization are among the most effective
teaching and learning strategies because they increase understanding and
retention of information (Marzano & Brown, 2009; Marzano, Pickering, &
Pollock, 2001).
Individualized interpretations and feedback. This ingredient is made up of
face-to-face interactions (or other direct forms of communication such as telephone) between client and counselor, regardless of whether the intervention
is performed in a classroom, a group, or individually. Group interventions
in which individualized attention was provided yielded better career choice
outcomes than ones that did not include this critical ingredient (Brown
et al., 2003). Individualized interpretation and feedback could involve the
counselor providing written or verbal feedback to the client on speciﬁc
assignments (e.g., on goal setting) or throughout the process of counseling.
Additionally, helping clients understand and use personal assessment data
is part of this ingredient, especially if the assessment results are anomalous
or otherwise hard to understand (e.g., inconsistent RIASEC proﬁles; see
Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume).
Although Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) identiﬁed individual interpretations as one of the critical ingredients, there is little outcome research
related to precisely how practitioners should interpret the results of career
assessments. In analyzing studies published between 1983 and 1995, Whiston

572

Career Development and Counseling

and colleagues (1998) found no treatment/control comparison studies that
addressed individual test interpretation. Based on only two studies, Oliver
and Spokane (1988) found an unweighted effect size of .62 for individual
test interpretation. Fortunately, Chapters 14 through 17 of this book address
assessment in career counseling and provide practitioners with detailed
suggestions on using assessments in the areas of interests; needs and values;
abilities, aptitudes, and skills; and other career constructs.
Information about the world of work. Brown and colleagues (2003) deﬁned this
ingredient as the provision of opportunities in session to gather information
on the world of work and on speciﬁc career options. This ingredient can
seem even more critical today when one considers the enormous changes
that have occurred in the world of work due to the changing global economy,
changing gender roles, and the technology boom of the last two decades.
Now, more than ever, clients who are making or remaking career choices
need to be armed with information about the environment, expectations, and
options within the world of work (DeBell, 2006). Clients can easily become
overwhelmed in the face of such enormity and beneﬁt from gathering some
of this information and processing it in session. Although occupational
information has typically been a part of career counseling, Brown and Ryan
Krane’s (2000) ﬁndings clearly indicate that it is important to process that
information in session.
Modeling. Providing clients with examples of others who have been successful in making or remaking a career choice decision is the basis of modeling
(Ryan, 1999). This process can actually take many forms. For instance,
practitioners can model this personally through sharing career experiences,
personal illustrations of using the Holland codes to select careers for exploration, or other career decision-making experiences. Other forms of modeling
include exposing clients to mentors or guest speakers (e.g., in workshops or
class interventions). Video presentations may also be implemented as part
of this ingredient as a substitute or supplement to other forms of modeling.
Group career counseling or class modalities could include opportunities
for participants to learn from each other’s successful career choice-making
experiences. However, it is important to note that although all of the studies in the Ryan (1999) meta-analysis that implemented modeling strategies
yielded signiﬁcant effect sizes, Brown and colleagues (2003) found that those
studies that employed ‘‘expert’’ modeling yielded much larger effect sizes
than those that used ‘‘peer’’ modeling. Therefore, although peer-to-peer
modeling may beneﬁt clients, clinicians should consider avoiding its use as
the sole modeling intervention in a career-choice program.

Promotion of Career Choices

573

Increasing environmental supports. Ryan (1999) deﬁned this critical ingredient
as ‘‘providing clients with practical suggestions, information, or assistance
concerning how to obtain more ﬁnancial or emotional support from their
environment’’ (p. 88). Because career choice making or remaking is a process
accomplished in a context and not in isolation within a client’s life, many
factors could serve to spur on or inhibit a client’s career choices. For instance,
perceived barriers (e.g., family role deﬁnition or family responsibilities)
might impede implementation of a career goal, whereas a myriad of protective factors (e.g., supportive family or school environment) may facilitate
conﬁdence in the career choice, ultimately leading to successful transition
into that occupation.
Brown and colleagues (2003) found surprisingly few studies that examined
attention to building support, but those that did yielded an average effect
size of .83. Of those studies included in Brown and colleagues’ analysis, most
concerned building parental support for career choice. These ﬁndings are
consistent with Whiston and Keller’s (2004) ﬁnding that parental support,
particularly for individuals of color, plays a key role in the career development of adolescents and young adults. These ﬁndings are also consistent
with some of the central tenets of social cognitive career theory (see Lent,
Chapter 5, this volume), in which support plays a critical role in overcoming
career barriers and inﬂuences both self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations.
Nevertheless, this critical ingredient, out of the ﬁve critical ingredients, has
the least research supporting it. Therefore, Brown and colleagues encouraged practitioners to combine this intervention with written exercises by
having clients write down potential obstacles to successful choice making and possible sources from which to draw support for overcoming
these obstacles.
Although none of the studies in Brown and Ryan Krane’s (2000) metaanalysis included more than three of the ﬁve critical ingredients, some recent
studies have included more or all of the ingredients with primarily positive
results. Hirschi and Läge (2008) conducted workshops based on all of the
critical ingredients with Swiss adolescents. They found that, compared to
a control condition, the intervention group had higher scores on career
decidedness, career planning, career exploration, and vocational identity
measures at both postintervention and at a 12-week follow-up. Also with
clients from Switzerland, Masdonati, Massoudi, and Rossier (2009) evaluated
the effectiveness of individual career counseling that included four of the
ﬁve critical ingredients (i.e., workbooks and written exercises, individualized
interpretation and feedback, world of work information, and attention to
building support). The pretest–posttest comparisons reﬂected quite large
effect sizes, with the effect size for life satisfaction of .68 and the effect size
for career decision-making difﬁculties of .98. Perdrix and colleagues (2012),

574

Career Development and Counseling

following up with these same clients a year later, found a continued decrease
in career indecision and maintenance of gains in clients’ satisfaction with life.
In reﬁning a career counseling course for American college students based
on the critical ingredients, Reese and Miller (2010) found that the course
consistently improved career decision-making self-efﬁcacy but had a less
consistent inﬂuence on career decision-making difﬁculties.
For practitioners involved in career choice counseling, there is strong
empirical support for the ﬁve critical ingredients. Juntunen (2006) hypothesized that sometimes practitioners shy away from addressing clients’
vocational issues because they have little knowledge about best practices,
and the ﬁve critical ingredients provide sound guidance for these clinicians. The ﬁve critical ingredients can be applicable either for clients who
present with career choice dilemmas or for clients in which vocational
choice issues unfold during the counseling process. What is important is the
degree of empirical support for the ﬁve critical ingredients and, therefore,
the conﬁdence practitioners can have in using these interventions in session
with clients.
Other Process Factors
Heppner and Heppner (2003) referred to career counseling process variables
as the overt and covert thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of both clients and
counselors while engaged in counseling. The ﬁve critical ingredients found
by Brown and colleagues (Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000; Brown et al., 2003)
are process factors that a counselor would engage in while conducting
career choice counseling; however, there are other process factors in career
choice counseling that have been empirically explored. These process factors
may inﬂuence career choice outcomes, but the research results are not so
compelling as to merit the label of critical ingredients.
Although Meara and Patton (1994) contended that the client–counselor
working alliance is an essential process component within career counseling,
there has been limited research on the inﬂuence of the working alliance in
career counseling compared to psychotherapy (Heppner & Heppner, 2003).
Lewis (2001) did not ﬁnd a difference between the working alliance scores
of clients in either career or personal counseling. Perdrix, de Roten, Kolly,
and Rossier (2010) compared the working alliance scores of Swiss clients
in career counseling and those in personal counseling. They found no
difference in terms of bond or agreement on tasks, but they did ﬁnd that
career counseling clients tended to report higher scores related to agreement
on goals than the clients in personal counseling. In another study with Swiss
clients, Masdonati, Massoudi, and Rossier (2009) found that the working
alliance at the end of four to ﬁve sessions of individual career counseling

Promotion of Career Choices

575

was signiﬁcantly related to outcome measured as increased life satisfaction
and decreased career decision-making difﬁculty.
In an interesting study of process variables, Littman-Ovadia (2008) examined the interaction among clients’ attachment styles and counselors’
functioning as a secure base. Not all of the clients in this study were in
counseling to address career choice issues, although career choice was the
focus of counseling for the majority (65%). In a general indication of the
effectiveness of career counseling, Littman-Ovadia found that all clients,
irrespective of attachment style, were more likely to engage in career exploration at the end of the career counseling as compared to the beginning. She
also found that clients either high or low in anxiety or avoidance tendencies
were equally likely to engage in career exploration after working with counselors who were adept at providing a secure base. Hence, counselors who
were high in caregiving behaviors appeared to have a crucial inﬂuence on
the career exploration activities of clients across attachment styles.
Modalities
Although Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) found that the ﬁve critical ingredients inﬂuenced career choice outcome measures across different treatment
modalities, there is a body of research related to the effectiveness of different treatment modalities. Whiston and colleagues (1998) found individual
career counseling to have the largest effect size (ES = .75) as compared to
other modalities (e.g., group, classes), and the gains associated with individual counseling were accomplished on average in less than a single hour.
In calculating effect sizes related to career choice, Brown and Ryan Krane
(2000) found that group counseling had the largest effect sizes (ES = .55),
followed by class (ES = .43) and individual counseling (ES = .41). In considering career interventions for the promotion of career choice, Folsom
and Reardon (2003) examined the effectiveness of career courses at colleges
and universities. They found that in 34 of the 38 studies identiﬁed, career
counseling courses resulted in positive outcomes related to career maturity, career decision making, vocational identity and thoughts, and locus of
control. Further, when the outcomes were course satisfaction and retention
(both to the next semester and until graduation), 13 of the 15 studies had
positive ﬁndings.
Whiston, Brechiesen, and Stephens (2003) compared the effectiveness
of different career modalities and did not ﬁnd that one approach was
signiﬁcantly more effective than another. Conversely, they did ﬁnd that
one modality, counselor-free interventions (e.g., computers program used
in isolation), was signiﬁcantly less effective than any other type of treatment
that involved counseling. This ﬁnding was consistent with Whiston and

576

Career Development and Counseling

colleagues’ (1998) earlier report of a nonsigniﬁcant effect size (ES = .11) for
counselor-free interventions.
Practitioners should consider Whiston and colleagues’ (2003) ﬁnding that
counselor-free interventions are less effective than modalities that involve
counselors in the development of career interventions, and, whenever possible, counseling activities should be integrated into career development
programming. Some schools and counseling organizations are investing
in computer-assisted career guidance systems (e.g., DISCOVER, SIGI3 ) to
provide career assistance. These programs are also available through the
Internet, and individuals can easily use them in isolation. Although some of
these programs are quite comprehensive, Gore, Bobek, Robbins, and Shayne
(2006) found that only 3% of students could be classiﬁed as ‘‘in-depth’’ users
who utilized a comprehensive program for more than 1 hour; the majority
used one of these programs only once and for less than 30 minutes. It may be
difﬁcult for a 30-minute intervention to have much impact, which reinforces
the need for career counseling to accompany the use of computer-assisted
career guidance systems. This is consistent with Whiston and colleagues’
(2003) ﬁndings that computer-assisted career guidance systems supplemented by counseling were found to have signiﬁcantly better outcomes than
interventions that relied solely on the computerized system. Hence, practitioners can be assured that their role in career counseling is particularly vital
and adds value beyond simple exposure to computerized programs.
Client Factors
In a seminal article, Fretz (1981) made a plea for more research related to
the question of which clients beneﬁt from what type of career counseling.
Fretz’s call for research on client aptitude-by-treatment interactions is still
relevant today as we are beginning to examine client attributes or aptitudes
and how they interact with certain types of career counseling. Although
there are many client factors that may be of interest to practitioners, we
have limited our discussion to client factors that have been empirically
investigated and where there is sufﬁcient research to draw some conclusions
related to practice.
Age. In considering client factors that may contribute to the promotion of
career choice, practitioners may be interested in whether different types
of treatments work better with clients of different ages. Related to college
students, Mau and Fernandes (2001) found that younger college students
(i.e., less than 26 years old) were more likely to use career counseling
services than older students, but there were no differences between the two
age groups related to their satisfaction with career counseling.

Promotion of Career Choices

577

Sometimes there are questions about whether interventions designed
to promote career choice are most effective for adolescents and college
students and less effective with other age groups. In an interesting study
of Swiss clients, Perdrix and colleagues (2012) compared career choice
counseling received by younger clients (14 to 21 years old) versus older
clients (22 to 56 years old). The clients received four or ﬁve sessions of
career counseling that contained four of ﬁve of Brown and Ryan Krane’s
(2000) critical ingredients. At the 1-year follow-up, both groups had the same
sustained satisfaction, but some interesting differences occurred in changes
in career decision-making difﬁculties between the two groups: Younger
clients’ career decision difﬁculties continued to decrease between the time
they ﬁnished counseling and the time of the 1-year follow-up. However,
older clients’ career decision-making difﬁculty decreased only during the
time of the counseling and then stabilized. In general, however, Perdrix and
colleagues’ results indicate that career choice counseling is effective with
adolescents, young adults, and older adults.
Gender. In their meta-analysis, Brown and Ryan Krane (2000) found 18
studies that compared whether males or females beneﬁted more from career
counseling. Only 3 of the 18 studies reported signiﬁcant outcome differences
between men and women. Interestingly, in each of those three studies,
women had higher levels of career maturity at posttreatment than men. Mau
and Fernandes (2001) found no signiﬁcant gender difference in terms of
usage of career counseling services at a university; however, they found that
women reported slightly higher levels of satisfaction with career counseling
than men. Conversely, Healy (2001) did not ﬁnd gender differences in
terms of satisfaction with either a brief career program or a more in-depth
individual career counseling approach.
Race and ethnicity. In terms of race and ethnicity, neither Ryan (1999) nor
Whiston and colleagues (1998) were able to analyze effect sizes with diverse
groups because race and ethnicity information was so infrequently reported.
Carter, Scales, Juby, Collins, and Wan (2003), however, found that race was
related to the number of sessions students attended at a university-based
career development center. They found that, on average, Black students
were most likely to attend only one session, whereas Asian and Hispanic
students were most likely to attend two to nine sessions. White students
were most likely to attend 10 or more sessions. This trend is disturbing,
as Fouad and Byars-Winston’s (2005) meta-analysis found that racial and
ethnic minorities perceived fewer career opportunities and greater career
barriers than their White counterparts. Interestingly, in a meta-analysis,

578

Career Development and Counseling

Nichols (2009) hypothesized that there would be an inverse relation between
the percentage of racial and ethnic minorities in a study and effect size (i.e.,
effect size would go down as the percentage of people of color increased).
Although they did not ﬁnd support for this hypothesis, they did ﬁnd a
relationship between career maturity effect sizes and the degree to which
the career interventions were intentionally tailored to clients’ developmental
levels and to cultural factors.
An excellent example of a research program related to career interventions
with one group of clients is Kim and colleagues’ research related to the career
counseling process with Asian American clients. Kim and Atkinson (2002)
examined the impact on the career counseling process of Asian American
clients’ adherence to Asian values and counselors’ ethnicity and expression
of cultural values. Counselors were trained to conduct a career counseling
session based on a trait-factor theory and to express either Asian or U.S.
cultural values during the session. Although the researchers postulated that
the Asian American clients would evaluate the sessions conducted by Asian
American counselors more positively than those conducted by European
American counselors, they found that the Asian American clients rated the
sessions as more positive and arousing if they were conducted by European
American counselors. However, clients’ adherence to cultural values played
an important role in their evaluation of the session: Clients with high (versus
low) adherence to Asian values rated the Asian counselors as being more
empathetic and credible.
Kim, Li, and Liang (2002) also evaluated Asian American clients’ experiences in career counseling based on their level of adherence to Asian values,
and their results were also somewhat contradictory. In general, Asian American clients rated the session as being better if the counselors focused on
immediate problem resolution as compared to insight attainment. However,
contrary to expectations, clients with high adherence to Asian cultural values
tended to evaluate the counselors as being more empathic and the working alliance as stronger than clients with low adherence to Asian cultural
values. In addition, clients with high adherence to Asian values tended
to perceive the counselor as being more cross-culturally competent if the
counselor focused on the expression of feelings as compared to counselors
who focused on the expression of cognition.
Li and Kim (2004) had less equivocal results when they examined Asian
American clients’ cultural values and a directive versus a nondirective
form of career counseling. They found that regardless of cultural values,
Asian American clients preferred a directive style of career counseling.
These ﬁndings are noteworthy, as they indicate that in practice, clinicians
should not just consider race or ethnicity but also consider adherence to
cultural values. Moreover, the results indicate that adherence to cultural

Promotion of Career Choices

579

values and evaluation of the career counseling process is complex; therefore,
counselors should not make assumptions about the counseling process based
on simplistic stereotypes.
In a rare study that compared treatment designed speciﬁcally for diverse
adolescents (i.e., integrative contextual model) versus treatment as usual,
Turner and Conkel (2010) found that those in the integrative contextual
model group (see Turner & Lapan, Chapter 19, this volume) reported more
emotional support than those in the treatment as usual group. This ﬁnding
may be related to the integrative contextual model’s focus on the utilization
of social support in regard to overcoming societal and career barriers, which
is similar to Brown and Ryan Krane’s (2000) critical ingredient of building
support. Therefore, the critical ingredient of building social support for a
career decision may be particularly germane in working with diverse clients.
Problem-solving appraisal. Making a career choice is similar to solving a
problem, and, thus, better problem solvers may have better outcomes in
career counseling. Heppner and colleagues (2004) examined the role of
clients’ problem-solving appraisal on process and outcome factors in career
counseling. Not only did these researchers examine clients’ problem-solving
abilities at the start of counseling and how they affected outcome but also
they examined whether changes in problem-solving appraisal during the
course of career counseling affected outcome (i.e., did those whose abilities
to solve problems increased during career counseling have better outcomes?).
Their adult clients participated in at least three sessions of career counseling.
Heppner and colleagues (2004) found that problem-solving appraisal scores
and other measures of outcome increased between the beginning and the end
of career counseling. They also found that clients who entered counseling
with high versus low problem-solving appraisal skills were more likely to
become more decisive about their careers as a result of the career counseling.
Lee, Park, and Heppner (2009) reanalyzed Heppner and colleagues’ (2004)
data using a cross-lagged panel design and veriﬁed Heppner and colleagues’
contention that counselors should consider clients’ precounseling problemsolving abilities in designing career interventions. Heppner and colleagues
(2004) also found that if clients experience a positive change in terms of
problem-solving appraisal during career counseling, they were more likely
to have better psychological resources in career transitions and greater goal
directedness at the end of the career counseling than clients whose problemsolving abilities did not increase. These results indicate that practitioners
should consider clients’ abilities to solve problems at the beginning of career
counseling and attempt to increase their abilities to solve problems through
the career counseling process.

580

Career Development and Counseling

In conclusion, as this discussion reﬂects, researchers have not been very
successful in identifying which types of career choice interventions are more
effective with different types of clients. This may be related to the client
characteristics that researchers have been studying, which have primarily
been demographic variables (e.g., age, gender). What may be more pertinent
is to use diagnostic criteria as the basis for treatment decisions. Using
psychotherapy as an analogy, researchers may not be considering that some
clients are depressed whereas others are anxious and are providing the
same treatment to both sets of clients. Rounds and Tinsley (1984) called
for the development of a vocational problem diagnostic scheme that both
researchers and practitioners could use to identify clients who need more indepth services versus those who may need help in a single area. Therefore,
the development of a vocational diagnostic system may provide a good
starting point for tailoring treatment to the needs of the client.
DECISION-MAKING DIFFICULTIES
In terms of diagnostic schemes relevant to career choice counseling,
researchers have made signiﬁcant progress in targeting clients’ difﬁculties
with career decision making. One of the ﬁrst to make a diagnostic distinction
was Salomone (1982), when he differentiated between undecided and
indecisive clients. According to Salomone, an undecided client is someone
who has yet to make a decision but for whom the process is normal and
common; by contrast, an indecisive client is someone who has chronic
problems with decision making, and the chronicity of the decision-making
problems is rooted in psychological issues. Salomone’s distinction between
undecided and indecisive clients drew from Holland and Holland’s (1977)
description of an indecisive disposition in which individuals are difﬁcult to
treat because they suffer from a complex cluster of maladaptive attitudes
and coping behaviors.
According to Salomone, indecisive clients suffer from identity diffusion
and substantial anxiety and, therefore, are diagnostically different from
undecided individuals who may experience some mild anxiety related to
having not yet reached a decision. This diagnostic distinction is important
because more traditional career counseling techniques may be extremely
helpful to the undecided individual but signiﬁcantly less helpful in addressing the chronically maladaptive personality characteristics of the indecisive
client. Hence, Salomone (1982) urged practitioners to distinguish between
these two forms of indecision and provide appropriate career counseling
based on the diagnostic decision.

Promotion of Career Choices

581

A prominent researcher in vocational psychology, Itamar Gati, has been
instrumental in developing two taxonomies related to career decisionmaking difﬁculties. According to Gati and Amir (2010), locating clients’
career decision-making difﬁculties is one of the ﬁrst steps in career counseling. Gati, Krausz, and Osipow (1996) proposed a taxonomy of career
decision-making difﬁculties by starting with the ‘‘ideal career decision
maker’’ and then identifying deviations from this theoretical ideal. They
proposed that career decision-making difﬁculties are comprised of three
major clusters: lack of readiness, lack of information, and inconsistent information. Gati and colleagues’ taxonomy is hierarchical, with 10 subcategories
that further identify and specify the career decision-making difﬁculty. For
example, under the lack of readiness cluster, three subcategories further
delineate the lack of readiness as being related to (a) lack of motivation,
(b) general indecisiveness, or (c) dysfunctional beliefs. In the category of
lack of information, the subcategories concern lack of information on (a) the
career decision-making process, (b) self, (c) occupations (i.e., alternatives),
and (d) obtaining information. The last category concerns inconsistent information due to (a) unreliable information, (b) internal conﬂicts, and (c) external
conﬂicts. On the basis of the taxonomy, Gati and colleagues (1996) developed
the Career Decision-Making Difﬁculties Questionnaire (CDDQ). A number
of studies have been conducted related to the psychometric qualities of the
CDDQ, which have supported its use with clients from various countries
(e.g., Amir & Gati, 2006; Creed & Yin, 2006; Gati, Osipow, Krausz, & Saka,
2000; Mau, 2001).
Saka, Gati, and Kelly (2008) hypothesized that there is a distinction
between developmental indecision and more chronic, pervasive indecisiveness mainly stemming from personality and emotional factors, and
they focused on developing a theoretical framework for understanding the
emotional and personality-related aspects of career decision-making difﬁculties. Based on a review of the literature, they ﬁrst identiﬁed variables
that were consistently correlated with career indecision and indecisiveness,
which were pessimistic views, anxiety, and self-concept and identity. Similar to Gati and colleagues’ (1996) model of cognitive decision making, the
emotional and personality-related model is hierarchical, and there are 11
subcategories that correspond to the categories of pessimistic views, anxiety, and self-concept and identity. Under the category of pessimistic views
are the subcategories of pessimistic views about (a) the process, (b) the
world of work, and (c) one’s control. In terms of anxiety, the subcategories
are anxiety about (a) the process, (b) uncertainty, (c) the choice, and (d)
the outcomes. The subcategories within the category of self and identity

582

Career Development and Counseling

are (a) general anxiety, (b) self-esteem, (c) uncrystallized identity, and (d)
conﬂictual attachment and separation. Based on this model, Saka and colleagues (2008) developed the Emotional and Personality Career Difﬁculties
Scale (EPCD), which measures the 11 subcategories and 3 categories. Using
eight Israeli samples and eight iterations of the EPCD, Saka and colleagues
arrived at a 53-item instrument with strong psychometric indicators. They
also examined an English version of the EPCD with an American sample
and found the instrument held up well, with the exception that the uncrystallized identity scale was included in the anxiety cluster instead of that of
self-concept and identity.
Another signiﬁcant researcher conducting studies of types of career indecision is Steven Brown, whose research has taken a different approach from
Gati and colleagues. Rather than taking the rational or top-down approach
of Gati and colleagues, Brown and Rector (2008) took a bottom-up approach
by extracting latent variables from the correlations matrices from already
published studies of career indecision. To identify the latent factors of career
indecision, Brown and Rector used an iterative technique of factor analyzing
these correlation matrices and a meta-analytic factor analysis to arrive at a
four-factor solution.
The ﬁrst factor identiﬁed by Brown and Rector (2008) was labeled indecisiveness/trait negative affect as the loadings were consistent with previous
literature on indecisiveness (e.g., Salomone, 1982) and the core trait of negative affect (e.g., Watson & Clark, 1984). The construct of trait negative
affect concerns negativity to work and life satisfaction with difﬁculties in
making decisions in various aspects of life (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 22,
this volume). In a follow-up factor analysis, Brown and colleagues (2011)
developed a 167-item instrument and found that indecision-related items
loaded on both of the ﬁrst two factors of Brown and Rector; hence, they
renamed the ﬁrst factor neuroticism/negative affectivity. The second factor
identiﬁed by Brown and Rector concerned the latent dimension of lack of
information and includes deﬁciencies in terms of information regarding both
self and occupations. A set of variables that loaded on this factor concerned
an approach–approach conﬂict, in which an individual needs information
to choose between or among some appealing options. In the factor analysis
conducted by Brown and colleagues (2011), additional items reﬂecting an
inability to commit to, and anxiety about, making a decision also loaded
highly on the second factor, and this factor was renamed choice/commitment
anxiety factor.
The third factor related to vocational decision-making problems found by
Brown and Rector (2008) involved interpersonal conﬂicts and barriers. Similar to
Gati and colleagues’ (1996) external conﬂict subscale, this latent factor related
to conﬂicts or disagreements with signiﬁcant others and differing opinions

Promotion of Career Choices

583

on preferred career directions. The fourth factor in Brown and Rector’s taxonomy was labeled lack of readiness. This factor is deﬁned by identity diffusion
(see Brown & Ryan Krane, 2000), lack of self-clarity, and low career decisionmaking self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Hence, high scores in this area reﬂect a pattern
of developmental deﬁcits in terms of self-knowledge, decision-making attitudes and skills, and goal-setting abilities. Brown and colleagues’ (2011)
factor analysis supported the structure of the third and fourth factors. In our
view, clinicians should consider all four factors (i.e., neuroticism/negative
affectivity, choice/commitment anxiety factor, interpersonal conﬂicts and
barriers, and lack of readiness) in career decision-making case conceptualization because considering only the most apparent problematic factor may
impede the clinician’s abilities to adequately conceptualize the complexities
associated with career indecision.
Certainly, there are similarities between Brown and colleagues’ (2011)
four-factor model and Gati and colleagues’ (1996) and Saka and colleagues’
(2008) models of career decision-making difﬁculties. Brown and colleagues
explored these similarities by factor-analyzing the interfacet correlation
matrices published by Gati and colleagues and Saka and colleagues and
found that, in part, Gati and colleagues’ cognitive and personality/emotional
models could be recast in terms of Brown and colleagues’ four-factor model.
Whereas Brown and colleagues’ model has some clinical parsimony and
utility for practitioners over using Gati and colleagues’ two models and
instruments (i.e., the CDDQ and the EPCD), there are also some limitations.
First, more research has been conducted related to Gati and colleagues’
models, as this research began in the early 1990s, whereas Brown and Rector’s
(2008) model is a more recent contribution, and there has been less time for
researchers to validate and corroborate their ﬁndings. Second, although
Brown and colleagues have recently developed an instrument, Gati and
colleagues have developed and reﬁned two existing instruments. Conversely,
using two instruments to identify career decision-making difﬁculties may be
unrealistic in many ﬁeld-based settings. Currently, Hacker, Carr, Abrams,
and Brown (in press) have developed a 65-item instrument (Career Indecision
Proﬁle-65) to measure their four factors. Although this instrument needs
additional psychometric investigation, it may ultimately be a useful tool to
identify major sources of clients’ decision-making difﬁculties.
In conclusion, we anticipate that this resurgence in research related to
career decision-making difﬁculties or factors underlying career indecision
will result in practitioners having a better understanding of the process
of making career decisions and better tools for diagnosing types of career
indecision with clients. What is particularly encouraging about research
on decision-making difﬁculties or types of indecision is the quality of the
research currently being conducted by these well-respected scholars in the

584

Career Development and Counseling

ﬁeld of career counseling. Based on the research in this area, when clinicians
are working with clients, they should consider both the level and type
of indecision. Although the ﬁeld has yet to reach consensus about the
precise types of career indecision or decision-making difﬁculties, researchers
have clearly found that both cognitive and emotional-affect components
contribute to difﬁculties in making career choices.
FUTURE RESEARCH
We now focus brieﬂy on needs for future research on career choice and its
promotion. There have been numerous calls for more process and outcome
research in career counseling (Brown et al., 2003; Whiston & Rahardja, 2008),
particularly with international populations (Bernes, Bardick, & Orr, 2007;
Hartung, 2005). Recent research related to the process of career counseling
has provide some information, but Heppner and Heppner’s (2003) contention
that ‘‘remarkably little is known about what underlying processes and
mechanisms lead to effective change in career counseling’’ (p. 429) is still
relevant to career choice counseling.
Although Brown and Ryan Krane’s (2000) ﬁve critical ingredients provide an empirically based foundation for career choice interventions, further
research is needed to verify these ingredients. In psychotherapy research,
there is a history of using dismantling and constructive design strategies
in which interventions or components are added, subtracted, or varied,
and outcome is then assessed (Høglend, 1999). Conducting dismantling and
constructive strategies with the ﬁve critical ingredients and other process
variables with different populations could provide more detailed information to practitioners about which factors are truly critical with which types of
clients. With advances in diagnostic systems, we may learn that some of the
critical ingredients may be needed for certain clients, whereas other clients
may need treatments that include more than these particular ingredients.
Therefore, the development of a vocationally oriented diagnostic system is
critical for answering the question of what works with which type of client
and under what conditions. This recommendation is consistent with Brown
and McPartland’s (2005) assertion that little can be gained from additional
studies that employ vague, one-size-ﬁts-all treatments.
In our view, there is a need to examine career choice interventions with
individuals from different socioeconomic classes, as we found very few
studies that directly considered socioeconomic status. This is somewhat
surprising, given Blustein and colleagues’ (2002) ﬁnding that social class
plays a signiﬁcant role in vocational development and that individuals from
a lower (versus higher) socioeconomic status were less likely to see work as
a means for satisfaction and had fewer academic and vocational resources

Promotion of Career Choices

585

(see also Juntunen, Ali, & Pietrantonio, Chapter 9, this volume). In our
opinion, the lack of research targeted at helping individuals from lower
socioeconomic strata is one of the largest gaps in career choice counseling
research. Therefore, practitioners who are committed to social justice issues
should work in concert with researchers to conduct studies about which
career interventions will lead to better career outcomes for those who may
face both perceived and real environmental barriers as a result of their
social class.
Although there has been some research related to career choice interventions with individuals from different racial and ethnic groups, much
of the research has involved Asian American clients. As indicated earlier,
Fouad and Byars-Winston’s (2005) meta-analysis found that racial and ethnic
minorities perceived fewer career opportunities and greater career barriers
than their White counterparts. Hence, there is also a need to conduct intervention research with diverse racial and ethnic groups, particularly with
African American and Latino clients, who represent a signiﬁcant proportion of the population in the United States. Working with diverse clients
should not be restricted to the United States; many international scholars are
investigating the effectiveness of career choice interventions, and they also
should be encouraged to use samples reﬂecting the diversity of clients within
their countries.
There have been a number of calls for methodological diversity in regard
to research designs used in evaluating the effectiveness of career interventions. Perry, Dauwalder, and Bonnett (2009) asserted that both qualitative
and quantitative methods are needed to answer questions regarding the
efﬁcacy of career interventions and that the choice of methodology should
be dependent on the research question. Moreover, Perry (2009) argued that
tests of the efﬁcacy of vocational guidance, particularly with underserved
populations, can best be accomplished with mixed-methods approaches.
We reiterate the call for methodological diversity and believe the research
methodology should match the research questions; however, we suggest
that there is a signiﬁcant need for large-scale, clinical trials research.
Clinical trials research has evolved from medical research in which individuals are randomly assigned to either the treatment group or the placebo
or treatment as usual group. Clinical trials research is also common in psychotherapy and, to some extent, educational research. Analogous to medical
research, where the researcher must ensure that the medical or pharmaceutical intervention is properly administered, vocational researchers must
ensure that a speciﬁc career intervention is administered. In psychotherapy
research, this is labeled treatment integrity, and issues of treatment integrity
are typically met by using treatment manuals and supervising psychotherapists to certify that clients are actually receiving the intended treatment. One

586

Career Development and Counseling

of the limitations in career choice counseling is the lack of treatment manuals
(Bernes et al., 2007; Whiston, 2002). To conduct large-scale clinical trials
research, vocational researchers will probably need to work with multiple
sites; thus, issues of treatment integrity and the development of treatment
manuals are essential. Once treatment manuals are tested in the ﬁeld with
a large number of participants and found to be effective, then practitioners
can use these treatment approaches and be conﬁdent in their effectiveness.
Furthermore, unless there is a clear understanding of the status and quality
of the outcome measures used, conclusions about the gains clients are
experiencing have little practical utility. Savickas (1989) called for the development of a standard battery of sound, career-related instruments that could
be used in career counseling outcome research. We would like to reiterate
this call and suggest that this goal is attainable for career choice counseling.
A battery of assessments is needed because outcome assessment is best
accomplished when researchers use multiple assessments from multiple
perspectives (Hill & Lambert, 2004). Based on that premise, Whiston (2001)
provided a scheme for selecting multiple career outcome assessments.
Regarding a battery of outcome assessments, it has been observed that
researchers are moving away from using measures of career maturity and
more frequently using measures of decidedness (Folsom & Reardon, 2003;
Whiston, 2002). As noted earlier, advances are being made at developing and
validating instruments to assess career decision-making difﬁculties. We also
noted the increased usage of measures of career decision-making self-efﬁcacy
in career intervention outcome research. These advances related to career
decision making are laudable; however, we suggest that researchers focus
on developing other domain-speciﬁc measures of career choice counseling,
such as measures of the degree to which choices are being implemented.
Perry and colleagues (2009) suggested that researchers conduct more studies of the cost-effectiveness of career counseling. Whiston (2011) indicated
that, for some policy makers and stakeholders, the major question is not
whether vocational or career interventions can help people; for them, the
question is rather whether these interventions are cost-effective. Whiston
suggested further examination of the degree to which career interventions
inﬂuence gains in employment and decreases in school dropout rates and
then the evaluation of the economic beneﬁts associated with those outcomes.
To conduct some cost-beneﬁt analyses, such as whether career choice interventions affect unemployment rates and save on governmental expenditures,
researchers will need to conduct more longitudinal studies of career choice
interventions (Bernes et al., 2007).
Although we are calling for research in a number of areas, we would like to
conclude this section by applauding the research that has been and is being
conducted on the promotion of career choice. The extant research can inform

Promotion of Career Choices

587

practitioners globally on methods for intervening to assist people in making
sound career decisions. As is evident from this chapter, researchers are
working internationally to provide insight into what types of intervention
facilitate career choice or decision making. The following provides a brief
summary of these research ﬁndings, with a focus on informing practitioners
about relevant trends that can enhance their work with clients.
CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS
In reﬂecting on the literature related to the promotion of career choice, we
offer the following conclusions and suggestions. These comments are not
inclusive of all the research discussed in this chapter but are intended to
highlight major themes and ﬁndings.
• On average, career choice counseling is moderately effective, and the

results appear to be long-term. The effectiveness of career choice interventions, however, seems to vary, depending on what is included in the
career counseling.
• Career choice counseling can probably best be implemented in four
or ﬁve sessions, yet it appears that it is not solely the length of the
counseling that inﬂuences effectiveness but, once again, what is included
in the counseling.
• Practitioners should incorporate ﬁve critical ingredients that have been
shown to increase the effectiveness of career choice counseling. These
ingredients are (a) workbooks and written exercises (especially written
goal setting and occupational comparisons), (b) individualized interpretations and feedback on written goals and hard-to-interpret assessment
results, (c) in-session occupational information exploration; (d) modeling, and (e) increasing environmental support. Not only do the ﬁve
critical ingredients seem to be individually important but also combinations of them yield larger effect sizes than any one individually. Hence,
these ﬁve ingredients do, indeed, seem to be critical in inﬂuencing career
choice outcomes.
• Many potential clients have expectations about the career choice counseling process (e.g., wanting simply to be given occupational information)
that do not align well with the critical ingredients. If not addressed,
such incompatible expectations may hamper the effectiveness of the
counseling process. Some research supports the use of role induction
activities, in which clients are provided with information regarding the
importance of their active participation in career choice counseling.
• Counselor involvement seems to play an important role in the process,
as counselor-free interventions have been found to be less effective than

588

Career Development and Counseling

any other type of career counseling modality (e.g., individual or group
career counseling). Furthermore, there is empirical evidence that many
users of computerized career guidance systems use these systems only
brieﬂy, so practitioners should not rely on them as the sole provider of
career guidance.
• Although there has been research related to client factors that may
inﬂuence career choice outcome, the ﬁndings are generally equivocal. One of the reasons for this lack of deﬁnitive results may be the
slow pace of developing diagnostic taxonomies that could be used to
match interventions to clients’ diagnostic needs. The development of a
vocational diagnostic system would be beneﬁcial for practitioners, who
could use it for screening, case conceptualization, treatment planning,
and evaluative purposes.
• Two researchers (i.e., Itamar Gati and Steven Brown) are developing diagnostic systems and assessment instruments related to career
decision making that have practical utility. According to Gati and
colleagues (Gati et al., 1996), career decision-making difﬁculties are primarily related to lack of readiness, lack of information, and inconsistent
information; Saka and colleagues (2008) also maintain that emotional
or personality-related problems associated with career decision making are represented by the constructs of pessimistic views, anxiety,
and self-concept and identity. Using a different approach, Brown and
colleagues (2011) identiﬁed four primary career decision difﬁculties:
neuroticism/negative affectivity, choice/commitment anxiety, interpersonal conﬂicts and barriers, and lack of readiness. Both approaches show
promising empirical support, overlap somewhat, and should be considered by practitioners to diagnose career choice-making difﬁculties.
Doing so can help to develop differential treatment plans speciﬁc to
client need and, therefore, avoid a one-size-ﬁts-all approach that may
be less efﬁcient or effective.
• There is a need for a standard outcome assessment battery related
to career choice counseling that could be used by both clinicians and
researchers.
• There are a number of research areas related to the promotion of
career choice where practitioners and researchers could collaborate,
thus enriching our knowledge of what counseling interventions facilitate
career choice. In particular, we suggest that this research focus on clients
living in poverty and other marginalized groups.
Although we have discussed research related to the promotion of career
choice in this chapter, it would be negligent to conclude without addressing
the point made by a number of noted vocational psychologists (e.g., Blustein,

Promotion of Career Choices

589

2006, 2008; Fouad, 2007) who have asserted that career choice is a luxury not
afforded to the working poor and other marginalized groups. As indicated
by Fouad (2007), one ‘‘cannot assume that all individuals have work choices,
that they will enter a career until they choose to leave it, or that opportunities
are open to all’’ (p. 544). Blustein (2006, 2008) argued that career counseling
theories and research have often overlooked millions of individuals globally
for whom career choice is an elusive construct that does not ﬁt their working
lives, in which work serves more as a means of survival than an expression
of talents or personality. Therefore, we would like to encourage practitioners
to be agents of social justice and deliberately work toward changing social
structures that impede the career opportunities of all. The second section of
this book addresses many of the inequities that currently exist and provides
practitioners with suggestions for remedying these inequities. In a perfect
world, career choices would not be a luxury afforded to some, but an aspect
of everyone’s life. In concluding this chapter, we would like to encourage
readers to consciously identify ways in which they can inﬂuence society so
that opportunities for career choice become a reality for all individuals.
REFERENCES
Amir, T., & Gati, I. (2006). Facets of career decision-making difﬁculties. British Journal
of Guidance & Counselling, 34(4), 483–503. doi:10.1080/03069880600942608
Bernes, K. B., Bardick, A. D., & Orr, D. T. (2007). Career guidance and counselling efﬁcacy studies: An international research agenda. International Journal for Educational
and Vocational Guidance, 7(2), 81–96. doi:10.1007/s10775-007-9114-8
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blustein, D. L. (2008). The role of work in psychological health and well-being: A
conceptual, historical, and public policy perspective. American Psychologist, 63,
228–240. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.63.4.228
Blustein, D. L., Chaves, A. P., Diemer, M. A., Gallagher, L. A., Marshall, K. G.,
Sirin, S., & Bhati, K. S. (2002). Voices of the forgotten half: The role of social class
in the school-to-work transition. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 49(3), 311–323.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.49.3.311
Brown, S. D., Hacker, J., Abrams, M., Carr, A., Rector, C., Lamp, K., Siena, A. (2011).
Validation of a four-factor model of career indecision. Journal of Career Assessment,
20, 1–19. doi:10.1177/1069072711417154
Brown, S. D., & McPartland, E. B. (2005). Career interventions: Current status and
future directions. In W. B. Walsh & M. L. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational
psychology: Theory, research, and practice (3rd ed., pp. 195–226). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Brown, S. D., & Rector, C. C. (2008). Conceptualizing and diagnosing problems
in vocational decision making. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of
counseling psychology (4th ed., pp. 392–407). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

590

Career Development and Counseling

Brown, S. D., & Ryan Krane, N. E. (2000). Four (or ﬁve) sessions and a cloud of dust:
Old assumptions and new observations about career counseling. In S. D. Brown
& R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (3rd ed., pp. 740–766). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Brown, S. D., Ryan Krane, N. E., Brecheisen, J., Castelino, P., Budisin, I., Miller, M.,
& Edens, L. (2003). Critical ingredients of career choice interventions: More
analyses and new hypotheses. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62(3), 411–428.
doi:10.1016/S0001-8791(02)00052-0
Carter, R. T., Scales, J. E., Juby, H. L., Collins, N. M., & Wan, C. M. (2003). Seeking
career services on campus: Racial differences in referral, process, and outcome.
Journal of Career Assessment, 11(4), 393–404. doi:10.1177/1069072703255835
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Creed, P. A., & Yin, W. O. (2006). Reliability and validity of a Chinese version
of the career decision-making difﬁculties questionnaire. International Journal for
Educational and Vocational Guidance, 6(1), 47–63. doi:10.1007/s10775-006-0003
DeBell, C. (2006). What all applied psychologists should know about work.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 37(4), 325–333. doi:10.1037/07357028.37.4.325
Folsom, B., & Reardon, R. (2003). College career courses: Design and accountability.
Journal of Career Assessment, 11(4), 421–450. doi:10.1177/1069072703255875
Fouad, N. A. (2007). Work and vocational psychology: Theory, research, and applications. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 543–564. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych
.58.110405.085713
Fouad, N. A., & Byars-Winston, A. M. (2005). Cultural context of career choice:
Meta-analysis of race/ethnicity differences. Career Development Quarterly, 53,
223–233.
Fouad, N. A., Chen, Y., Guillen, A., Henry, C., Kantamneni, N., Novakovic, A.,
Terry, S. (2007). Role induction in career counseling. Career Development Quarterly,
56(1), 19–33.
Fretz, B. R. (1981). Evaluating the effectiveness of career interventions. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 28(1), 77–90. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.28.1.77
Galassi, J. P., Crace, R. K., Martin, G. A., James, R. M., & Wallace, R. L. (1992). Client
preferences and anticipations in career counseling: A preliminary investigation.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 39(1), 46–55. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.39.1.46
Gati, I., & Amir, T. (2010). Applying a systemic procedure to locate career decisionmaking difﬁculties. Career Development Quarterly, 58(4), 301–320.
Gati, I., Krausz, M., & Osipow, S. H. (1996). A taxonomy of difﬁculties in career decision making. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43(4), 510–526. doi:10.1037/00220167.43.4.510
Gati, I., Osipow, S. H., Krausz, M., & Saka, N. (2000). Validity of the career decisionmaking difﬁculties questionnaire: Counselee versus career counselor perceptions.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 56(1), 99–113. doi:10.1006/jvbe.1999.1710
Gore, P. A., Bobek, B. L., Robbins, S. B., & Shayne, L. (2006). Computer-based career
exploration: Usage patterns and a typology of users. Journal of Career Assessment,
14(4), 421–436. doi:10.1177/1069072706288939

Promotion of Career Choices

591

Hacker, J., Carr, A., Abrams, M., & Brown, S. D. (in press). Development of the
Career Indecision Proﬁle: Factor structure, reliability, and validity. Journal of Career
Assessment.
Hartung, P. J. (2005). Internationalizing career counseling: Emptying our cups and
learning from each other. Career Development Quarterly, 54, 12–16.
Healy, C. (2001). A follow-up of adult career counseling clients of a university
extension center. Career Development Quarterly, 49, 363–373.
Heppner, M. J., & Heppner, P. P. (2003). Identifying process variables in career
counseling: A research agenda. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62(3), 429–452.
doi:10.1016/S0001-8791(02)00053-2
Heppner, M. J., Lee, D., Heppner, P. P., McKinnon, L. C., Multon, K. D., & Gysbers,
N. C. (2004). The role of problem-solving appraisal in the process and outcome of
career counseling. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65(2), 217–238. doi:10.1016/S00018791(03)00100-3
Hill, C. E., & Lambert, M. J. (2004). Methodological issues in studying psychotherapy
processes and outcomes. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garﬁeld’s handbook of
psychotherapy and behavior (5th ed., pp. 84–135). New York: Wiley.
Hirschi, A., & Läge, D. (2008). Increasing the career choice readiness of young
adolescents: An evaluation study. International Journal for Educational and Vocational
Guidance, 8(2), 95–110. doi:10.1007/s10775-008-9139-7
Høglend, P. (1999). Psychotherapy research: New ﬁndings and implications for
training and practice. Journal of Psychotherapy Practice & Research, 8(4), 257–263.
Holland, J. L., & Holland, J. E. (1977). Vocational indecision: More evidence and
speculation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 24(5), 404–414. doi:10.1037/00220167.24.5.404
Juntunen, C. L. (2006). The psychology of working: The clinical context. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 37(4), 342–350. doi:10.1037/0735-7028.37.4.342
Kim, B. S. K., & Atkinson, D. R. (2002). Asian American client adherence to
Asian cultural values, counselor expression of cultural values, counselor ethnicity, and career counseling process. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 49(1), 3–13.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.49.1.3
Kim, B. S. K., Li, L. C., & Liang, T. H. (2002). Effects of Asian American client
adherence to Asian cultural values, session goal, and counselor emphasis of client
expression on career counseling process. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 49(3),
342–354. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.49.3.342
Lapan, R. T., Aoyagi, M., & Kayson, M. (2007). Helping rural adolescents make
successful postsecondary transitions: A longitudinal study. Professional School
Counseling, 10(3), 266–272.
Lee, D., Park, H., & Heppner, M. J. (2009). Do clients’ problem-solving appraisals
predict career counseling outcomes or vice versa? A reanalysis of Heppner, et al.
Psychological Reports, 105(3), 1159–1166.
Lewis, J. (2001). Career and personal counseling: Comparing process and outcome.
Journal of Employment Counseling, 38, 82–90.
Li, L. C., & Kim, B. S. K. (2004). Effects of counseling style and client adherence to
Asian cultural values on counseling process with Asian American college students.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51(2), 158–167. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.51.2.158

592

Career Development and Counseling

Littman-Ovadia, H. (2008). The effect of client attachment style and counselor
functioning on career exploration. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73(3), 434–439.
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2008.08.004
Marzano, R. J., & Brown, J. L. (2009). A handbook for the art and science of teaching.
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Marzano, R. J., Pickering, D. J., & Pollock, J. E. (2001). Classroom instruction that
works: Research-based strategies for improving student achievement. Alexandria, VA:
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Masdonati, J., Massoudi, K., & Rossier, J. (2009). Effectiveness of career counseling
and the impact of the working alliance. Journal of Career Development, 36(2),
183–203. doi:10.1177/0894845309340798
Mau, W. (2001). Assessing career decision-making difﬁculties: A cross-cultural study.
Journal of Career Assessment, 9(4), 353–364. doi:10.1177/106907270100900403
Mau, W., & Fernandes, A. (2001). Characteristics and satisfaction of students who
used career counseling services. Journal of College Student Development, 42(6),
581–588.
Meara, N. M., & Patton, M. J. (1994). Contributions of the working alliance in the
practice of career counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 43(2), 161–177.
Miller, M. J., & Brown, S. D. (2005). Counseling for career choice: implications for
improving interventions and working with diverse populations. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory and research to
work (pp. 441–465). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Nichols, G. C. (2009). Career interventions in context: A meta-analysis examining the
inﬂuence of environmental factors on outcome (Doctoral Dissertation, University of
Wisconsin).
Oliver, L. W., & Spokane, A. R. (1988). Career-intervention outcome: What contributes to client gain? Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35(4), 447–462. doi:10.1037
/0022-0167.35.4.447
Perdrix, S., de Roten, Y., Kolly, S., & Rossier, J. (2010). The psychometric properties
of the WAI in a career counseling setting: Comparison with a personal counseling
sample. Journal of Career Assessment, 18(4), 409–419. doi:10.1177/1069072710374583
Perdrix, S., Stauffer, S., Masdonati, J., Massoudi, K., & Rossier, J. (2012). Effectiveness
of career counseling: A one-year follow-up. Journal of Vocational Behavior.
Perry, J. C. (2009). A combined social action, mixed methods approach to vocational
guidance efﬁcacy research. International Journal for Educational and Vocational
Guidance, 9(2), 111–123. doi:10.1007/s10775-009-9158-z
Perry, J. C., Dauwalder, J. P., & Bonnett, H. R. (2009). Verifying the efﬁcacy of
vocational guidance programs: Procedures, problems, and potential directions.
Career Development Quarterly, 57(4), 348–357.
Reese, R. J., & Miller, C. D. (2010). Using outcome to improve a career development
course: Closing the scientist-practitioner gap. Journal of Career Assessment, 18(2),
207–219. doi:10.1177/1069072709354309
Rochlen, A. B., Mohr, J. J., & Hargrove, B. K. (1999). Development of the attitudes
toward career counseling scale. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46(2), 196–206.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.46.2.196

Promotion of Career Choices

593

Rochlen, A. B., & O’Brien, K. M. (2002a). Men’s reasons for and against seeking help for career-related concerns. Journal of Men’s Studies, 11(1), 55–63.
doi:10.3149/jms.1101.55
Rochlen, A. B., & O’Brien, K. M. (2002b). The relation of male gender role conﬂict and attitudes toward career counseling to interest in and preferences for
different career counseling styles. Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 3(1), 9–21.
doi:10.1037/1524-9220.3.1.9
Rounds, J. B., & Tinsley, T. J. (1984). Diagnosis and treatment of vocational problems.
In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (pp. 137–177).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Ryan N. E. (1999). Career counseling and career choice goal attainment: A meta-analytically
derived model for career counseling practice. Unpublished dissertation, Loyola University, Chicago.
Saka, N., Gati, I., & Kelly, K. R. (2008). Emotional and personality-related aspects
of career-decision-making difﬁculties. Journal of Career Assessment, 16(4), 403–424.
doi:10.1177/1069072708318900
Salomone, P. R. (1982). Difﬁcult cases in career counseling: II. The indecisive client.
Personnel and Guidance Journal, 60, 496–499.
Savickas, M. L. (1989). Annual review: Practice and research in career counseling
and development, 1988. Career Development Quarterly, 38(2), 100–134.
Shivy, V. A., & Koehly, L. M. (2002). Client perceptions of and preferences for
university-based career services. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 60(1), 40–60.
doi:10.1006/jvbe.2001.1811
Spokane, A. R., & Oliver, L. W. (1983). Outcomes of vocational intervention. In
S. H. Osipow & W. B. Walsh (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (pp. 99–136).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Turner, S. L., & Conkel, J. L. (2010). Evaluation of a career development skills
intervention with adolescents living in an inner city. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 88(4), 457–465.
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience
aversive emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96(3), 465–490. doi:10.1037/00332909.96.3.465
Whiston, S. C. (2001). Selecting career outcome assessments: An organizational
scheme. Journal of Career Assessment, 9(3), 215–228. doi:10.1177/10690727010090
0301
Whiston, S. C. (2002). Application of the principles: Career counseling and interventions. Counseling Psychologist, 30, 218–237. doi:10.1177/0011000002302002
Whiston, S. C. (2011). Vocational counseling and interventions: An exploration of
future ‘‘big’’ questions. Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 287–295.
Whiston, S. C., Brecheisen, B. K., & Stephens, J. (2003). Does treatment modality
affect career counseling effectiveness? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62(3), 390–410.
doi:10.1016/S0001-8791(02)00050-7
Whiston, S. C., & Keller, B. K. (2004). The inﬂuences of the family of origin on career
development: A review and analysis. Counseling Psychologist, 32(4), 493–568.
doi:10.1177/0011000004265660

594

Career Development and Counseling

Whiston, S. C., & Rahardja, D. (2008). Vocational counseling process and outcome.
In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed.,
pp. 444–461). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Whiston, S. C., Sexton, T. L., & Lasoff, D. L. (1998). Career-intervention outcome:
A replication and extension of Oliver and Spokane (1988). Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 45(2), 150–165. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.45.2.150
Whitaker, L. A., Phillips, J. C., & Tokar, D. M. (2004). Inﬂuencing client expectations
about career counseling using a videotaped intervention. Career Development
Quarterly, 52(4), 309–322.

C H A P T E R 21

Interventions to Aid Job Finding
and Choice Implementation
LARAE M. JOME AND SUSAN D. PHILLIPS

H

AVING ARRIVED AT A promising vocational direction, the next task in the

career development process is to implement one’s choice. Toward
that end, counselors may be called on to assist clients in identifying
opportunities and helping them develop the skills to successfully present
themselves to potential employers. It is clear that the work world has been
undergoing vast changes since the ﬁrst edition of this book. Factors such as
technological advances, the global marketplace, and economic crises have
affected almost all aspects of society (see Lent & Brown, Chapter 1, this
volume) and, in turn, the job-ﬁnding and implementation processes have
shifted as well. One of the most profound areas of change has been in the
use of the Internet and other electronic technology (Selden & Orenstein,
2011; Tso, Yau, & Cheung, 2010). Today, for example, job seekers are likely
to use the Internet and e-mail to explore career information, ﬁnd resources
for creating resumes and tips for interviewing, post their resumes, network,
scroll through job listings, and submit job applications. Another major
change in the current work world is the shift in the nature and availability
of work in the United States and worldwide.
With this current context in mind, we approach the question of what
the vocational literature can offer researchers and practitioners seeking to
facilitate the choice implementation and job-ﬁnding process with clients.
Choice implementation refers to the process by which individuals identify
career goals and then seek opportunities for work in areas that reﬂect
those goals. Job ﬁnding encompasses the search behaviors of job seekers
in pursuing the goal of obtaining employment. Although these may be
distinct processes at times, we focus on the totality of the implementing and
595

596

Career Development and Counseling

searching process; thus, we use terms such as job searching, job ﬁnding, and
choice implementation interchangeably throughout the chapter.
How can job seekers best prepare for and engage in the job-search process? What strategies and characteristics are most helpful in this process,
and what characteristics make the process more difﬁcult? What advice can
be gleaned from the research literature for career counselors and students
learning about career counseling? We consulted the literature from a broad
range of ﬁelds (i.e., vocational psychology, industrial/organizational psychology, rehabilitation psychology, sociology) from the last decade and
summarize here the kinds of job-seeking strategies and interventions suggested by this literature.
Scholars (Blau, 1994; Kanfer, Wanberg, & Kantrowitz, 2001; Van Hooft &
Noordzij, 2009) have conceptualized the job search as a self-regulatory
process with multiple phases. In the initial phase, an individual makes a
decision—voluntary or otherwise—to search for a job and become a job
seeker. Essentially, the individual develops the goal of searching for a job,
and this goal then guides the individual’s job-searching intentions and
behavior. Following this preparatory stage, individuals engage in an active
job search and put time and effort into job search behaviors, with the ﬁnal
goal of obtaining employment or reemployment. This chapter highlights the
active search phase, focusing ﬁrst on methods of job searching (i.e., the ways
in which job seekers locate job openings and possibilities). The second section
discusses how individuals convince others to employ them (e.g., preparing
a compelling resume, developing interviewing skills). Following this, we
focus on various moderating factors that affect how individuals engage in
the job search process (i.e., what demographic, motivational, and cognitive
factors play a role in how individuals navigate the search and persuasion
processes). Finally, we highlight recent intervention studies designed to
increase individuals’ success in the job-ﬁnding process and discuss their
implications for practice and research.
JOB SEARCH METHODS
One of the major questions faced by potential job seekers, whether they
are currently employed or unemployed, is what job openings are available
and accessible to them. In this section, we discuss the different job search
methods that are documented in the literature and commonly used by job
seekers and career practitioners; we also note additional, less mainstream
methods that are used by individuals who are excluded for various reasons
from more formal, traditional methods of job searching.
How do job seekers identify potential job openings? What methods do
job seekers use to identify accessible jobs? Van Hoye and Saks (2008)

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

597

compiled a list of six job-searching methods that capture the various methods used by job seekers: ‘‘looking at job ads [in newspapers or job postings
on the Internet], visiting job sites, networking, contacting employment agencies, contacting employers, submitting applications’’ (p. 362). Technology
has greatly expanded the avenues by which job seekers track down open
positions. Although the basic methods of searching through job advertisements, networking, completing applications, and sending resumes persist,
the Internet has made it possible for job seekers to do many of these activities
from one location with the help of a computer, Internet connection, and
e-mail account.
Van Hoye and Saks (2008) found some evidence that individuals might use
different search methods, depending on their speciﬁc job objective. Among
employed Belgian and Romanian individuals who had a master’s degree
and were enrolled in graduate business classes, those whose main job search
objective was to ﬁnd a new job tended to use all the job search methods; those
whose objective was to stay abreast of alternative job possibilities tended
to engage in more passive search methods, such as looking at job ads and
visiting Web sites. Those who wanted to develop a network of professional
relationships employed relational strategies, such as contacting employers
and networking, and those who wanted leverage against a current or
potential employer tended to contact other employers. Although this study
did not make any connections between search methods and outcomes,
the ﬁndings suggest the value of career counselors making sure that they
understand the many possible objectives of the job seeker and not assuming
that the individual is always focused on ﬁnding new employment.
We next discuss some of the most common methods of job searching:
using job ads, networking, and internships and volunteer opportunities. In
addition, we brieﬂy discuss alternative methods of job searching that are
more commonly used by immigrants, illegal residents, and others who are
barred from typical routes to ﬁnding employment.
Job Advertisements
As documented in the research literature, the most common method of
identifying potential jobs is looking at job advertisements, whether they are
printed in newspapers or posted on Internet sites (e.g., Cannata, 2010; Try,
2005; Wanberg, Glomb, Song, & Sorenson, 2005). For example, in Wanberg
and colleagues’ (2005) study on job search persistence, unemployed job seekers reported that the most popular and consistent job search strategies they
used were newspaper advertisements and Internet job postings, followed by
networking and sending out resumes. Modern job seekers, especially those
who are under 40, are likely to go to the Internet as the ﬁrst source for

598

Career Development and Counseling

exploring job ads. Job-seeking materials and books in the popular literature
(e.g., Bolles, 2011) are full of tips on using the Internet to search and typically
provide listings of websites that post job advertisements.
In the days before the Internet, employers looking to hire would take
out an advertisement in a local or national paper or place a sign out
in front of the place of business. Today, in addition to, and sometimes
instead of, these methods, employers may post the job advertisement on the
company website. Given that job seekers would need to identify the speciﬁc
company or institution to locate these job ads, a number of larger electronic
recruitment websites have been developed, at which companies can pay a
third party to post information about job openings, search resumes, and
collect resumes from interested job seekers (Lin, 2010). These e-recruitment
service providers list openings in a variety of ﬁelds and occupations (e.g.,
http://www.monster.com); other websites are focused on jobs in a particular
subﬁeld or geographical area or are websites for local, state, or federal
government jobs (e.g., http://www.usajobs.gov). It is typically free for job
seekers to use the Web site to search for jobs as well as to post their resumes,
and the cost is passed on to employers.
We found two studies that highlighted the role of the Internet in identifying
speciﬁc job advertisements. In a study on teachers’ job-searching decisions,
Cannata (2010) found that all of the newly graduated teachers in her study
used the Internet as the primary source for identifying open positions.
Interestingly, three-quarters of the applicants searched the websites of the
school districts with which they were familiar, rather than doing a broader
search of school district websites, despite the extremely tight job market for
teachers. Lin (2010) studied the intentions of graduating Taiwanese high
school and college seniors to use e-recruitment websites for job searching.
Job seekers were more likely to have stronger intentions to use e-recruitment
websites when they had more positive attitudes about them (largely based on
how easy and useful they found them), perceived some social pressure from
others in their social network to use the websites, and felt more efﬁcacious
in navigating the websites.
Despite the limited generalizability of these studies, the ﬁndings raise
interesting issues. Clients might need information about where to search
on the Internet and which speciﬁc websites to explore; they might also
need encouragement (or social pressure) to go beyond their familiar spaces
(both geographically and in cyberspace) to expand the number and types
of websites they explore. The studies also highlight potential generational
differences in familiarity with and conﬁdence in using the Internet as a
search method. Today’s job searchers are at a distinct disadvantage if they
do not have an e-mail account or consistent access to the Internet because
many job applications and hiring procedures require individuals to submit

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

599

job materials electronically. Older job seekers, in particular, may have lower
self-efﬁcacy for using the Internet as a job search tool and may need training
on how to use the computer to search for information generally, as well as
additional help navigating particular websites.
Networking
Among the most common pieces of advice for the modern job seeker is
to use networking as a job search strategy (e.g., Bolles, 2011)—that is, to
use one’s personal connections with friends, family, and acquaintances to
garner information about potential job leads that are not available through
formal means, such as job ads. Granovetter (1973) distinguished between
formal (e.g., answering job ads) and informal (e.g., networking) methods of
job searching and further conceptualized informal networks as consisting
of strong (i.e., family and friends) and weak (i.e., acquaintances, friendsof-friends) ties. More recently Huang and Western (2011) differentiated
between market and social network methods of job searching. Market
methods describe ways that individuals seek out jobs using formal methods
such as sending out resumes, applying for jobs through advertisements, and
attending job fairs. Network methods, on the other hand, refer to informal
search methods in which job seekers use their relationships with other people
and their social connections to ﬁnd job leads.
Evidence in support of using one’s informal network suggests that it
is an effective tool in obtaining employment. Previous research ﬁndings
suggested that using weak ties, rather than strong ties, was a more effective
strategy to ﬁnding a job (e.g., Granovetter, 1995). Indeed, there is evidence
in the research literature that networking is a very important method for
identifying potential job leads. About half of the teachers in Cannata’s
(2010) study relied heavily on their professional social contacts and personal
contacts for identifying open positions, as well as for other aspects of the
job search process, such as providing information, feedback, and interview
preparation. A study of women working in the textile and apparel industry
found that informal networks of other women in the industry played a
key role in securing an initial position in the ﬁeld (Hodges, Karpova, &
Lentz, 2010).
Although networking is certainly an important job search method, recent
research ﬁndings have also drawn attention to some of the factors that might
hinder or limit the usefulness of this method. In a sample of Norwegian
college graduates, Try (2005) found that graduates with restricted social
capital (e.g., fewer highly educated friends and family) had less access to
informal search networks. Studying Australian employed adults, Huang
and Western (2011) found that using weak ties was more effective in

600

Career Development and Counseling

ﬁnding higher-paying jobs, whereas obtaining a job through strong ties was
associated with lower-paying jobs. Additionally, Van Hoye, van Hooft, and
Lievens (2009) found that unemployed Flemish adults who spent more time
networking were more likely to be reemployed; however, those who had
connections with higher-status others in their social network were more
likely to be reemployed than those with strong, low-status connections.
Redline and Rosenbaum (2010) also noted that individuals without a college
education and those from poorer families with lower levels of education
may have limited personal networks or have a social network comprised
mainly of strong, low-status ties that are not as likely to be facilitative in
the job-seeking process. They described a community college placement
program aimed at students whose personal social networks may not be
helpful in securing high-quality employment (i.e., low-income, students
from underrepresented groups) and found that participants beneﬁted most
from the use of institutional contacts in the job search process.
The research ﬁndings suggest that using social networking as a job search
method continues to be good advice for some job seekers. Networking can
provide information about job leads that are not found in other places. Those
with college degrees and those who can make connections with high-status
individuals (i.e., those individuals who are in positions of inﬂuence and
could help the job seeker get in the door for an interview) may be especially
able to beneﬁt from using their social network. Like most human endeavors,
however, the job-seeking situation is complex and inﬂuenced by multiple
factors, such as cultural context (Huang & Western, 2011) and the type of
social network one has (Redline & Rosenbaum, 2010; van Hoye et al., 2009).
Networking may not be the most efﬁcient method to use for job seekers who
have few connections with higher-status individuals.
Job seekers and counselors need to realize that ‘‘networking is not a
panacea’’ (van Hoye et al., 2009, p. 678). Rather than simply suggesting that
clients use their social network, a counselor might discuss how job seekers
can use their networks and encourage them to identify the weak ties in
their networks and not to rely entirely on close friends and family (van
Hoye et al., 2009). In addition, counselors need to recognize that networking
may be much easier for more extraverted individuals. With shyer, less
extraverted clients, they may need to go beyond providing basic advice
about networking to discuss and implement (e.g., role-playing) strategies for
overcoming anxieties about networking.
Internships, Apprenticeships, and Volunteer Opportunities
Students and new graduates are often encouraged to explore internships
as a way to learn more about a particular career and gain entrance to that

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

601

occupation. Very little research exists about the role of internships in the
job-ﬁnding and implementation process. Hodges and colleagues (2010)
found that about half of a sample of women who had entered the textile
and apparel industry obtained their positions by ﬁrst securing an internship in their current company. Research on apprenticeships is even sparser,
especially in the United States. Studies conducted in Europe found that
adolescents who successfully obtained apprenticeship positions had stayed
focused on the goal of obtaining an apprenticeship, engaged in more job
searching behaviors, and downgraded the level of prestige of their aspirations as the search continued (Haase, Heckhausen, & Köller, 2008; Tomasik,
Hardy, Haase, & Heckhausen, 2009).
Another potential job search method is to volunteer one’s time and services
at an agency or program in one’s area of interest. There may be multiple
beneﬁts of volunteering, such as using the experience gained at the site
to enhance one’s resume, making important networking connections, and
obtaining employment. Volunteering may not be feasible for many job
seekers, such as those with great ﬁnancial needs, and may be a more
attractive job search method for students and retirees.
Alternative Job Search Methods
Other job search methods suggested in the popular literature (e.g., visiting
job sites, using employment agencies, contacting employers directly) have,
unfortunately, received little, if any, research attention. Although there is
little reason to believe that these methods would be detrimental to the
job search process, there is no evidence that they add to the effectiveness
of the more established methods discussed. The job search methods outlined earlier—ads, networks, and internships—are viable tools for some job
seekers, yet it is clear that their effectiveness may be limited in more challenged educational or socioeconomic circumstances. More research is needed
on effective job search methods used by individuals with lower levels of
education and restricted access to employment resources, such as recent
immigrants, those with little or no English proﬁciency, those who lack familiarity with U.S. culture, or workers who are in the U.S. illegally or who have
engaged in illegal behavior in the past (e.g., ex-prisoners and prostitutes).
Clearly, much additional research is necessary to identify the potentially
unique needs of, and services for, these and other less privileged job seekers.
PERSUASION METHODS
Once individuals have identiﬁed one or more potential job possibilities, they
begin the process of trying to convince employers to hire them. Job seekers

602

Career Development and Counseling

essentially engage in a process of self-presentation and persuasion, which
comes more naturally to some clients than others. We describe here the two
main components of this process: resumes and interviewing.
The Resume
For many positions, especially professional positions requiring higher education, the ﬁrst step in the persuasion process is to submit a resume that
lists one’s credentials and experience. The resume often represents the ﬁrst
interaction with the potential employer. The content and appearance of the
resume can be essential in getting called for an interview or being placed
immediately in the reject pile. The resume may be printed out on highquality paper and mailed to prospective employers or may be submitted
electronically either via e-mail or through a particular website application.
Job searching websites are rife with advice on how job seekers can put
together a winning resume. Given that assistance with resume preparation
is one of the most common tasks of career counselors, it is vital that they are
knowledgeable about resumes and trained in how to help a diverse array of
clients create and revise effective resumes that best showcase the strengths
and skills of that individual, given their job goal.
Much of the extant research about job resumes is from the perspective
of the recruiter and organization and examines the cognitive processes
recruiters use in making judgments about resumes. For example, Tyler and
McCullough (2009) found that resumes of women who presented with more
agentic characteristics (e.g., competitive and boastful) that violated feminine
stereotypes were rated as less socially skilled by male raters. As another
example, Tsai, Chi, Huang, and Hsu (2011) found that based on the content
of job applicants’ resumes, campus recruiters in Taiwan made inferences
about the ﬁt of the applicant with the job and the organization, which
inﬂuenced recruiters’ hiring recommendations. The authors recommend that
job applicants tailor their resumes so that they highlight the ﬁt between the
applicants’ educational background and work experience and the particular
position and organization to which they are applying.
A number of recent studies and articles provide some good information for
counselors to consider in helping clients construct effective resumes. Johnson
and Lahey (2011) found that resumes of middle-aged female applicants to
entry-level positions that listed at least 1 year of post–high school vocational
training or computer training had a higher chance of being selected for an
interview than resumes with no additional vocational education or computer
training. Additionally, their results found that age was signiﬁcantly related
to the chance of receiving an interview, conﬁrming other ﬁndings suggesting
that older applicants are likely to have a harder time securing interviews and

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

603

employment. Adding information about hobbies, sports, and volunteering
did not greatly increase the chance of an interview, although the authors
caution that it may not hurt applicants to remain active and to consider
adding these characteristics to their resumes. One of the major implications
of the study is that job seekers, especially middle-aged women who may
have gaps in their experience in the paid workforce, could beneﬁt from
additional training and education. Counselors should be knowledgeable
about opportunities to help older job searchers overcome ﬁnancial barriers
to seeking additional training.
Toporek and Flamer (2009) discussed a narrative approach to resume
development. They noted that although counselors often focus on the content of the resume and approach it from the perspective of the role of editor,
critique, or coach, it may be beneﬁcial to approach the resume task from
the perspective of a counselor and advocate who helps the client construct
the story of his or her working life. Counselors can glean ideas about the
client’s interests, personality, barriers, anxieties, and unﬁnished business
and engage them in a process of rewriting their career story that includes
making changes to the resume document. In addition to the traditional
resume, some ﬁelds lend themselves well to the development of portfolios, where individuals can visually display their work. Willis and Wilkie
(2009) described the process by which business majors developed digital
portfolios that helped them see the connections between their academic
work and the competencies they were developing that could be presented to
potential employers.
Job seekers often need to submit a cover letter that accompanies their
resume in which they brieﬂy state their interest in and expertise for the
position. The cover letter, like the resume, provides a verbal snapshot of
the job seeker. Counselors can play a vital role in the process by critiquing
these documents to ensure that they are neat, concise, free of typographical
errors, and aesthetically pleasing and present the most accurate and appealing picture of the job seeker. In addition, counselors might be especially
important in facilitating a self-exploration process. Job seekers who have a
clear understanding of themselves and their search goals may ﬁnd it easier
to present a clear picture of themselves to employers via the resume and
cover letter.
The Job Interview
The interview can be both one of the most important steps in the hiring
process and a source of anxiety for many job seekers. For some jobs, there may
be multiple stages of the hiring process, with interviews with different levels
of management at each stage. The research in personnel psychology examines

604

Career Development and Counseling

interviewing from the perspective of the interviewer and has called attention
to issues of bias and fairness in the interview process (e.g., de Meijer, Born,
van Zielst, & van der Molen, 2007; Leasher, Miller, & Gooden, 2009). Derous
(2007) found that job applicants and recruiters differed in the characteristics
they valued in the application process. Applicants valued transparency
and feedback in the selection process and desired tailor-made interview
processes and being interviewed by warm, engaging interviewers. Recruiters
valued objectivity and preferred more standardized interviews. Their results
suggested that job applicants’ expectations for what they will encounter in
the interview may not match those of the interviewer. Counselors can help
clients adjust their expectations so they are not discouraged by a more
formal, impersonal interview process.
Very few recent studies focus on methods for enhancing applicants’ interviewing skills. Given that the interview can often make or break the hire
and that this can be a major source of worry for job seekers, discussing the
interviewing process and preparing clients for interviews is an important
topic in career counseling. It is vital that counselors become knowledgeable about interviewing skills and competent at helping clients to develop
these skills. For example, given the anxiety-provoking nature of interviews,
counselors can teach clients behavioral techniques to help them manage
their anxiety levels before and during an interview. Role-playing may be
especially effective because it allows the client to practice interviewing in
a safe environment and get immediate feedback from the counselor about
their behavior.
Counselors should be familiar with commonly asked interview questions
(e.g., ‘‘What are your strengths and weaknesses?’’ ‘‘Tell me about yourself,’’
and ‘‘What interests you about this position?’’) and questions that are illegal
to ask in the United States (e.g., ‘‘How old are you?’’ ‘‘Are you married?’’
‘‘Have you had any recent health issues?’’). In some job settings, employers
and search committees may not be up-to-date on the current legal issues
with regard to hiring and inadvertently ask the applicant illegal questions.
Counselors and clients can role-play how they might respond to such
questions in an interview. For example, if a client is asked, ‘‘How many
children do you have?’’ the counselor can help the client brainstorm ways in
which they might answer. Additionally, counselors can raise issues related
to contextual factors that might inﬂuence the interview. For example, ample
research suggests that gender and racial biases exist in the interviewing and
hiring process. Counselors can help clients be prepared for these realities
of the work world and develop coping skills in advance for dealing with
these issues.
As noted in our discussion of job search methods, for immigrants and
others new to the United States, it can be helpful for counselors to ensure that

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

605

clients have some familiarity with U.S. cultural norms and the expectations
that potential employers will have for workers during the interview and
hiring process. Cultural differences can be a potential source of confusion
and lost job opportunities, as immigrant interviewees and U.S.-born bosses
may have very different expectations regarding interpersonal behaviors,
such as shaking hands, degree of eye contact, types of questions that are
appropriate to ask, and the degree to which one might openly disagree with
a potential employer.
PREDICTORS OF JOB SEARCH AND PERSUASION
BEHAVIORS AND OUTCOMES
In the previous sections, we discussed the basic methods job seekers might
use to search for job openings and persuade employers to hire them.
We now consider the person and contextual variables that predict how
individuals approach and participate in the job search and persuasion
process. Searching for a job is not a linear and consistent process, but
rather a highly individualized process that waxes and wanes over time
and is inﬂuenced by multiple internal and external factors (Kanfer et al.,
2001; Wanberg et al., 2005). Given the unique personalities and contextual
factors of job seekers, the great variation in how job seekers go about the
job search process is not surprising. Some job seekers devote many hours
to the job search; others struggle to put in a few hours each week. Some
may possess a great sense of conﬁdence in their abilities to search for
a job and believe strongly that their searching will have positive results;
others are pessimistic about their employment prospects and struggle with
depressive feelings.
Kanfer and colleagues (2001) conceptualized the job search process as a
self-regulatory, dynamic, volitional, and autonomous process. Job seekers
must ultimately decide to engage in the search and take responsibility for
navigating the process. They must cope with the emotions and cognitions
that accompany the inevitable ups and downs of the job search process and
ﬁnd ways to stay motivated through the process. According to Kanfer and
colleagues’ model, multiple factors inﬂuence job seekers’ search behaviors
and employment outcomes, including their personality characteristics, general beliefs about themselves and the world, search motives and intentions,
the larger social context, and aspects related to their life history. Kanfer and
colleagues conducted a meta-analysis to examine the degree to which these
antecedents predicted both job search behaviors and employment outcomes.
In the following sections, we discuss the individual differences, variables,
and contextual factors that inﬂuence the job search and persuasion processes and discuss how counselors can apply these research ﬁndings in the

606

Career Development and Counseling

counseling process. First, however, we note how the research literature has
deﬁned the goals and objectives of the job search and summarize research
ﬁndings related to job search behaviors and outcomes.
Job Search Behaviors and Outcomes
In the research literature, the job search process has typically been operationalized as job search behaviors and employment outcomes. These
behaviors and outcomes are used to indicate whether a job seeker has
engaged in a more (or less) successful search. Typically, job search behaviors
have been deﬁned as the intensity and effort with which individuals engage
or persist in the search process, that is, the amount of time and degree of
effort devoted to speciﬁc job search tasks (e.g., searched job ads, submitted
resumes, went on interviews). Scholars have also examined the clarity of
the job search goal (i.e., how clearly the job seeker deﬁnes the objective of
the search).
Some studies focus on job search behaviors; others examine the outcomes
of the search process. Employment-related outcomes include variables such
as employment status (i.e., whether the individual obtained employment
or reemployment), the number of interviews or job offers received, degree
of satisfaction with the job, duration of the search, and the quality of
the reemployment (i.e., satisfaction, turnover intentions, person–job ﬁt).
Although the bulk of the job-searching research has focused on employmentrelated outcomes, there is growing attention to the negative psychological
and physical effects of unemployment (e.g., McKee-Ryan, Song, Wanberg, &
Kinicki, 2005).
One consistent ﬁnding, regardless of whether the job seeker is a college
student, unemployed adult, or employed worker, is that there are clear
beneﬁts to spending more time and putting in more effort in the job search if
the main objective is to obtain employment (Creed, King, Hood, & McKenzie,
2009; Crossley & Stanton, 2005; Kanfer et al., 2001; Van Hooft, Born, Taris,
and van der Flier, 2005; Wanberg, Hough, & Song, 2002). For example, Creed
and colleagues (2009) found that Australian job seekers who engaged in a
more intense job search and spent more time examining job ads, sending
out resumes, networking, and using other resources increased their chances
of obtaining employment. As another example, Saks (2006) found that
U.S. college students with greater job search intensity and job search selfefﬁcacy received more interviews, received more job offers, and were more
likely to be hired.
These ﬁndings highlight the importance of preparing job seekers for an
intensive job search because a more active, intense search is more likely to
result in successfully ﬁnding a job.

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

607

In addition to encouraging job seekers to put as much time and effort
into job searching as possible, counselors can also facilitate the self- and jobexploration process. Job seekers who jump into the active phase of the job
search without having clear job-searching goals may not present a cohesive
picture of themselves to potential employers in their resume and in the
interview. Clients with less insight into their interests and personalities and
with fuzzier ideas about the types of jobs they want to search for could,
therefore, beneﬁt from traditional career assessment of interests, values,
skills, and personality.
Factors That Inﬂuence the Job Search Process
Knowing that a more intense, active job search increases the chances for a
positive search outcome gives counselors some general ideas for increasing
the amount of job-searching behaviors in clients; however, it can be helpful
to have a more complete picture of the job seeker and understand the
factors that might facilitate or hinder the process. Scholars have identiﬁed
a number of variables related to the job-searching behaviors of job seekers,
and counselors can beneﬁt from understanding how these aspects might
inﬂuence the unique search process of individual clients. In the next sections,
we discuss the results of Kanfer and colleagues’ (2001) meta-analysis and
other studies within the past decade to shed light on the factors that
inﬂuence how job seekers approach and participate in the job search and
persuasion processes.
Personality characteristics. Personality traits have been found to relate to job
seekers’ behavior and to employment outcomes. Extraversion and conscientiousness show the strongest relationships with job search behaviors and
outcomes. Regardless of whether job seekers are unemployed adults (Kanfer
et al., 2001; Van Hoye et al., 2009), high-level managers (Boswell, Roehling,
& Boudreau, 2006), or college students (Turban, Stevens, & Lee, 2009), those
who are more extraverted and conscientious tend to engage in more job
search behaviors and report more interview and job offers. Kanfer and colleagues also found that greater openness to experience and agreeableness
were predictive of positive search behaviors and outcomes, although these
relationships tended to be weak. The effects of neuroticism are more mixed
and point to a complex picture of how neuroticism might inﬂuence the job
search process. Boswell and colleagues (2006) found that more neurotic job
seekers reported more job search behaviors. Kanfer and colleagues, however,
noted that measurement issues were inﬂuential: Neuroticism was related
negatively to job search intensity (typically measured as the amount of time
devoted to speciﬁc job search tasks) but positively to job search effort (the

608

Career Development and Counseling

degree of effort individuals put into their job search). Other studies have
found that one’s general disposition to experience positive and negative
emotional states also relates to job search success. Positive affectivity relates
positively to job search clarity (Côté, Saks, & Zikic, 2006) and job offers
(Turban et al., 2009); experiencing greater negative affect can inhibit job
search success (Crossley & Stanton, 2005).
Although counselors cannot necessarily change clients’ personality traits,
these ﬁndings nevertheless have relevance for serving individual clients’
needs and addressing barriers in the search and persuasion processes. Clients
who are naturally extraverted may have an easier time with the social interaction that accompanies many job search tasks, and greater conscientiousness is
associated with more successful search outcomes. Therefore, clients who are
less extraverted, less conscientious, and more neurotic may ﬁnd job search
activities more daunting and potentially more anxiety-producing, making
them good candidates for individual career counseling or support via job
clubs. Similarly, clients with less positive affect or more negative affect might
beneﬁt from cognitive restructuring techniques that help them reframe their
negative feelings about the job search and induce more positive emotions.
Having a more positive outlook may help them cope more effectively with
the inevitable disappointments in the job search process, as well as present
themselves more positively in interviews.
Expectancies and self-evaluations. It likely comes as no surprise to counselors
that how individuals feel about themselves and their general expectations
and perceptions of the world may inﬂuence the job search process. Kanfer
et al.’s (2001) ﬁndings suggest that when job seekers perceive that they
have some control in the job search process, they engage in a more active
job search. Although optimism was not signiﬁcantly related to job search
behaviors, it was predictive of positive employment outcomes (Kanfer et al.,
2001). In addition, self-esteem has been found to be associated with job search
behaviors and employment outcomes (Kanfer et al., 2001; Slebarska, Moser,
& Gunnesch-Luca, 2009), suggesting that fostering greater self-esteem in job
seekers can be beneﬁcial. Job search self-efﬁcacy, or the belief that one can
successfully master the job search tasks and process, has been positively
related to greater search behavior, as well as more positive interview and
employment outcomes (Côté et al., 2006; Kanfer et al., 2001; Saks, 2006;
Wanberg et al., 2005), and has also been found to mediate the relationships
between other antecedents (e.g., distress and negative affect) and job search
behaviors or outcomes (e.g., Crossley & Stanton, 2005). These ﬁndings again
highlight the importance of maintaining a positive outlook through the job
search process and having a positive self-concept. Job seekers with less
positive self-concepts and lower self-esteem might beneﬁt from individual

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

609

counseling or participating in job clubs to keep them motivated through the
job search process (Wanberg et al., 2005).
Job search motives, social support, and intentions. Kanfer et al. (2001) identiﬁed
a number of situational, motivational, and cognitive variables that were
inﬂuential in the job search process, including ﬁnancial need, employment
commitment, and social support. The degree of ﬁnancial need or economic
hardship of the job seeker has been found to be related positively to job
search behaviors (Van Hooft & Crossley, 2008), although not necessarily to
employment outcomes (Kanfer et al., 2001; Wanberg et al., 2002). Although
counselors cannot directly control the degree of ﬁnancial need or stress
related to economic hardship that clients experience, it can be helpful to
understand that these may not necessarily be counterproductive characteristics for job seekers because they may help motivate individuals to be more
active in this process.
Other motivational and cognitive variables that have been found to be
related to job search behaviors among unemployed adults include employment commitment or placing a high value on having a job (Creed et al.,
2009; Kanfer et al., 2001; Vansteenkiste, Lens, De Witte, & Feather, 2005),
having a greater learning goal orientation (Vansteenkiste et al., 2005), and
greater use of self-regulation strategies such as emotional and motivation
control (Creed et al., 2009). Taken together, these results suggest job seekers’
motivations for engaging in the job search—especially their commitment to
being employed and their ability to approach the job search process with an
attitude of learning and growing—may be important in facilitating a more
intense search. Counselors can also teach clients strategies to manage their
emotions related to the job search process to help them maintain a high level
of job search activities.
Feeling supported by others can increase job search behaviors and increase
the chance of a positive employment outcome (Kanfer et al., 2001). Slebarska
et al. (2009) suggested that in addition to the overall level of social support,
it may be important to assess whether individuals perceive that the support
is adequate. Not all job seekers may need the same level of support; for
example, some individuals may be receiving very little support, but it is just
enough or from the right source to be perceived as beneﬁcial.
There is a burgeoning body of research that applies Ajzen’s (1991) theory
of planned behavior framework to the job search process. We mention it
here because this line of research has focused on predicting job search
intentions, which can be conceptualized as a motivational antecedent of
job search behaviors (especially job search intensity). In general, research
ﬁndings have demonstrated empirical support for the theoretical model in

610

Career Development and Counseling

which job attitudes, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control, and
self-efﬁcacy are predictive of intentions to search, and these intentions, in
turn, are predictive of job search behaviors and employment outcomes (Jaidi,
Van Hooft, & Arends, 2011; Van Hooft & De Jong, 2009; Van Hooft et al.,
2005; Wanberg et al., 2005; Zikic & Saks, 2009). For example, Wanberg et al.
(2005) found that unemployed job seekers with more conﬁdence for engaging
in job search behaviors, who believed that their family and friends wanted
them to be searching for a job, reported greater intentions to work hard at
ﬁnding a job; those with greater job search intentions reported engaging in
more job search behaviors. The ﬁndings related to social norms highlight the
importance of other people in the behavior of the job seeker. Wanberg et al.
(2005) noted that family members might not appreciate how much time and
energy are required for a successful job search and expect the unemployed
individual to take on additional household chores and activities. Counselors
can provide some psychoeducational materials to job seekers and their
family members to give friends and family speciﬁc ideas of how they can be
most helpful and to facilitate realistic expectations for the process (Wanberg
et al., 2005).
Life history and demographic characteristics. Kanfer et al. (2001) identiﬁed a
number of demographic and human capital variables that were related to
different aspects of the job search process, such as age, race, gender, educational level, and job tenure. There is evidence that age is an inﬂuential
factor in getting hired and that older individuals may have a more difﬁcult
time in obtaining employment. Nakai, Chang, Snell, and Fluckinger (2011)
coined the phrase ‘‘mature job seeker’’ to refer to those individuals who
are mid-career (typically age 40) and above but not necessarily chronologically ‘‘older’’ workers. They identiﬁed three clusters of mature job seekers:
(1) satisﬁcers, whose main goal was to ﬁnd a job to meet ﬁnancial obligations; (2) maximizers, who reported a diverse range of needs and desires
largely centered on the parameters of the job (i.e., beneﬁts, full-time versus
part-time); and (3) free agents, who tended to be older with fewer family obligations and were focused on fulﬁlling individual needs in their job. Nakai
and colleagues suggested that each type may proﬁt from different forms
of help (e.g., satisﬁcers may need to be encouraged to search as broadly as
possible). In general, because it may take longer for older workers to ﬁnd
a job, counselors can provide support during periods of discouragement.
The social support provided in a job club may also be beneﬁcial for keeping
motivation up and coping with disappointments in the job search process.
Kanfer et al. (2001) found some interesting patterns related to race and gender. Racial and ethnic minority job seekers reported a longer job search than

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

611

Whites, although race was not related to employment outcomes. Similarly,
gender was related to job search behaviors but not employment outcomes.
Men tended to engage in more job-searching behaviors than women, and
when the type of search measure was examined, women reported greater job
search effort, and men reported a more intense search. These ﬁndings highlight how the job search process and hiring are not immune from the effects
of racial and gender socialization, as well as societal prejudice and discrimination. Although race and gender reﬂect individual characteristics that are
not malleable, counselors need to be aware of how stereotypes can inﬂuence
the hiring process and be prepared to help those most affected—women and
job seekers from racial and ethnic minority groups—to cope effectively with
potential discrimination experiences.
Having more education is associated with greater job search behavior
and likelihood of reemployment (Kanfer et al., 2001; Wanberg et al., 2002).
It may be beneﬁcial for clients to obtain additional job training or degrees
(Johnson & Lahey, 2011). Although research ﬁndings suggest that individuals with higher educational levels are more successful in the job search, in
difﬁcult economic times when jobs are scarce, individuals may opt to work
in jobs that are beneath their training, educational level, or skill level. There
is a growing research literature on underemployment (i.e., ‘‘working in a job
that is below the employee’s full working capacity’’; McKee-Ryan & Harvey,
2011, p. 963) and overqualiﬁed employees (i.e., having ‘‘surplus skills,
knowledge, abilities, education, experience, and other qualiﬁcations that are
not required by or utilized on the job’’; Erdogan, Bauer, Peiró, & Truxillo,
2011, p. 217). Recruiters may be less likely to consider applications from
overqualiﬁed individuals because they perceive that overqualiﬁed employees will be dissatisﬁed and disgruntled (Erdogan et al., 2011; Luksyte &
Spitzmueller, 2011). Erdogan and colleagues (2011) suggest that job applicants acknowledge their overqualiﬁcation very early on in the application
process and make a compelling case for why they should be considered, such
as highlighting the potential advantages and strengths they would bring to
the job. Counselors can help clients decide how they will market themselves
to alleviate managers’ fears that they will not be good employees.
Job Search Progress and Strategies
Counselors can beneﬁt from having a clear idea of the factors related
to search behaviors and employment outcomes, yet it might be even more
important to understand how individuals engage in the search process (Koen,
Klehe, Van Vianen, Zikic, & Nauta, 2010). Recent studies have focused on
understanding the progression of the search or the day-to-day activities,
as well as the strategies that individuals use to search. Wanberg, Zhu, and

612

Career Development and Counseling

Van Hooft (2010) noted that most of the job seekers in their sample spent
between 2 and 6 hours a day in job-searching activities. They examined
the daily progress of job seekers and found that on days that job seekers
perceived they made more progress on their job search, they reported more
positive affect and greater conﬁdence in ﬁnding a job. Those with greater
ﬁnancial hardship were more likely to perceive they had not made good
progress in the job search and reported more negative affect. When job
seekers reported low positive affect on one day, on the following day those
job seekers who had more difﬁculty disengaging from negative thoughts
tended to report less job search progress. In contrast, job seekers who could
more easily disengage from negative thoughts tended to report greater job
search progress on the next day. The implication of these ﬁndings is that
clients may cope very differently with the inherent ups and downs of the
job search process. Counselors need to assess to what degree their clients
might ruminate on their negative thoughts, which may impede their ability
to take action on search tasks. These clients may need more encouragement
to help them feel more positive and maintain their motivation to continue
job search efforts, whereas clients who are more action oriented might not
need as much cheerleading from the counselor.
Additionally, Wanberg and colleagues (2010) found that on days that job
seekers perceived that they had made good progress, the following day
they tended to not work as hard on job search tasks; conversely, not making
progress on one day was associated with greater progress the next day. These
ﬁndings suggest that job seekers might tend to take a break after working
hard on one day, and, at times, this strategy may not be in the best interest
of job seekers. Counselors may want to encourage job seekers to maintain a
consistent pace of job-ﬁnding activity from day to day (e.g., by putting in at
least a minimum number of hours).
The strategy that individuals use to search for jobs has been associated with
employment outcomes. A focused job search strategy (i.e., gearing the search
to speciﬁc jobs and organizations) might be the most effective approach for
job seekers who want to ﬁnd a high-quality (i.e., highly satisfying and
good person–job ﬁt) position. Job seekers using a focused search strategy
received more job offers (Koen et al., 2010) and reported more satisfying
reemployment (Crossley & Highhouse, 2005). An exploratory search strategy
(i.e., pursuing a broad array of opportunities) was associated with more job
offers yet, surprisingly, offers of lower quality (e.g., lower satisfaction,
poorer job–person ﬁt) (Crossley & Highhouse, 2005; Koen et al., 2010). These
ﬁndings suggest that although an exploratory strategy may be effective in
getting job offers, in the absence of clear goals for the job search, individuals
may be tempted to take the ﬁrst job offer that comes their way, even it if might
not be the best ﬁt. Finally, a haphazard strategy in which individuals do not

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

613

have a clear approach and use random methods to search unsystematically
may be the least effective strategy, as it was unrelated to employment
outcomes (Koen et al., 2010), and haphazard searchers tended to be less
satisﬁed with the jobs they found (Crossley & Highhouse, 2005).
JOB-FINDING INTERVENTIONS
In the preceding sections, we explored the methods job seekers use to search
for jobs, the strategies they employ to persuade others to hire them, and
the characteristics that inﬂuence how they engage in the job search process.
We end by discussing job-ﬁnding interventions reported in the research
literature and summarizing their effectiveness in helping participants obtain
employment, decrease psychological distress, and increase self-efﬁcacy for
the job-searching process.
Interventions for facilitating the job search behavior of job seekers have
largely employed a structured group model that relies on social learning
principles in teaching and reinforcing job search skills, as well as providing
emotional support through the job search process. The two most popular
of these group interventions are the Job Club (Azrin & Besalel, 1980; Azrin,
Flores, & Kaplan, 1975) and JOBS (Caplan, Vinokur, Price, & van Ryn, 1989).
Evidence of the efﬁcacy of these intervention programs has accumulated
since the early 1980s (Brown & McPartland, 2005).
In our current literature search, we found a number of diverse studies
examining the effectiveness of Job Club interventions for groups that ranged
from downsized executives to food service workers (e.g., Della-Posta &
Drummond, 2006; Franze & Ferrari, 2002; Van Hooft & Noordzij, 2009).
Although not all of the studies adhered to the speciﬁc Job Club procedures,
they all used a group format with unemployed or job-seeking adults that
provided information about the job search process; practice with speciﬁc job
searching, interviewing, or networking skills; and a focus on enhancing coping skills needed for a long-term job search. In general, the results suggested
that participants perceived interventions as effective (e.g., Kondo, 2009).
Providing additional treatment aimed at reducing anxiety and preparing job
seekers for the inevitable ups and downs of the job search process may be
especially helpful in maintaining high levels of motivation and self-efﬁcacy
for the job search.
There were a number of studies in the recent literature on the effectiveness of the JOBS program that strictly adhered to the guidelines of
the program. This program is focused on ﬁve elements: (1) increasing job
search knowledge and skills; (2) using active teaching methods (e.g., small
and large group exercises, role-plays); (3) using trainers who are skilled at
group facilitation and have adequate job search knowledge; (4) creating a

614

Career Development and Counseling

positive, supportive learning environment; and (5) preparing job seekers for
setbacks by increasing problem-solving skills, identifying potential barriers,
and enhancing motivation. The program has been found to be effective in
reducing job seekers’ psychological distress and facilitating reemployment
(Vuori, Price, Mutanen, & Malmberg-Heimonen, 2005; Vuori & Silvonen,
2005; Vuori & Vinokur, 2005). In particular, the components of increasing
job seekers’ conﬁdence in job-seeking tasks and preparing them to anticipate the ups and downs of the job search process contribute to the positive
employment outcomes.
In general, there is strong support for the effectiveness of Job Club groups
(Brown & McPartland, 2005). Although we uncovered a few studies that did
not report signiﬁcant effects on employment or psychological outcomes (e.g.,
Foley et al., 2010; Shirom, Vinokur, & Price, 2008), unique characteristics
of those samples (American Indians in substance abuse treatment, longterm unemployed adults) might account for these ﬁndings. Given that
the prevailing job-ﬁnding intervention uses a group format, these studies
raise a number of issues for counselors to consider in developing and
implementing job-ﬁnding groups. The group intervention has the potential
to provide individual group members with built-in social support for coping
with the multiple stressors associated with job seeking. Thus, facilitating
cohesion among the group members will be a vital task in successful
group interventions.
Research studies note attrition rates for participants, and although group
members may drop out for a variety of reasons, it raises the concern that the
group may have a negative inﬂuence on some individuals. Thus, it is important to have trained facilitators who are competent to observe and address
group dynamics (Curan, Wishart, & Gingrich, 1999). The constellation of the
group members may be important because it may be easier to bring about
cohesion when members have a shared experience such as unemployment
that brings them together. For example, Rutter and Jones (2007) ran a focus
group for counselor education students and found some evidence that Job
Club members might prefer a homogeneous group (i.e., individuals from
similar programs looking for similar jobs). In reﬂecting on the success of a
career intervention for battered women, Chronister (2006) noted that having
very heterogeneous groups with respect to ethnicity and social class made
it more difﬁcult for some groups to develop cohesion, and some members
eventually dropped out because they could not relate to the other members.
CONCLUSIONS AND TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
Additional research on effective job search and persuasion methods is
needed, particularly for individuals whose lives and circumstances are

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

615

encumbered by special challenges, such as recent immigrants with low
English proﬁciency, workers who are not legal residents, and individuals
transitioning from illegal work (e.g., selling drugs, prostitution) to legal
employment. However, the existing choice implementation and job-ﬁnding
literature does offer useful ideas for career counselors working with many
job seekers, whether they are new job entrants, job changers, or unemployed workers.
• Technological innovations have permeated all aspects of modern life,

and this is clearly evident in the methods job seekers use to locate open
positions, communicate with potential employers, and apply for jobs.
The Internet provides job seekers with information and resources at their
ﬁngertips, yet some job seekers may need assistance in navigating the
available information. Older workers in particular might need additional
training or encouragement to feel comfortable using technology in the
job-ﬁnding process.
• Many job seekers can beneﬁt from networking or using their personal
connections to identify potential job openings; however, this strategy is
especially effective for those with large social networks who can make
connections with people in positions of authority.
• Some job seekers can probably beneﬁt from using alternative job search
methods such as internships, co-op experiences, and volunteer activities,
yet we need to learn more about how these methods facilitate the process
of obtaining formal employment.
• There is some evidence that elements of vocational maturity, particularly clarity of self-concept, continue to be implicated in successful
implementation outcomes. Having greater clarity about one’s self and
one’s employment goals might facilitate a more focused, successful
search. Traditional career assessment activities that facilitate self- and
world-of-work exploration might be especially helpful for clients with
less clarity about themselves and their employment goals.
• Career counselors should be knowledgeable about resume preparation
so they can help job seekers present themselves most accurately and
persuasively in their resumes and cover letters.
• The results provide some clear evidence that job seekers who are more
active in the job search process greatly increase their chances of ﬁnding
a job. It may be helpful for counselors to provide clients with the gentle
push they need to be more active and help them cope more effectively
with the inevitable ups and downs of the process.
• The literature has identiﬁed a number of individual characteristics that
facilitate the job-ﬁnding process. These characteristics include qualities
such as being comfortable interacting with others, being conscientious,

616

Career Development and Counseling

having a positive outlook on life and a positive attitude toward the job
search, feeling good about oneself, having high job search self-efﬁcacy,
experiencing support from others, and being focused or intentional
about ﬁnding a job.
• Some characteristics of job seekers can hinder their ability to keep up an
active search. Clients who feel less control over the process, who struggle
with negative views about themselves, who experience high amounts of
anxiety, or who have little conﬁdence in their ability to search for a job
might beneﬁt from greater focus on these issues in individual counseling
or Job Club groups, rather than the simple message to be more active.
• There is good evidence that structured interventions (e.g., JOBS, the
Job Club) can aid the employment and mental health needs of many
unemployed individuals. It would be helpful to learn more about the
active elements of these interventions and to be able to include them in
both group and individual counseling contexts.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50, 179–211.
Azrin, N. H., & Besalel, V. A. (1980). Job club counselor’s manual: A behavioral approach
to vocational counseling. Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Azrin, N. H., Flores, R., & Kaplan, S. J. (1975). Job-ﬁnding club: A group
assisted program for obtaining employment. Behavior Research and Therapy, 13,
17–27.
Blau, G. (1994). Testing a two dimensional measure of job search behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 59, 288–312.
Bolles, R. N. (2011). What color is your parachute? A practical manual for job-hunters and
career-changers. Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed Press.
Boswell, W. R., Roehling, M. V., & Boudreau, J. W. (2006). The role of personality,
situation, and demographic variables in predicting job search among European managers. Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 783–794. doi:10.1016
/j.paid.2005.09.008
Brown, S. D., & McPartland, E. B. (2005). Career interventions: Current status and
future directions. In W. B. Walsh & M. L. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational
psychology (3rd ed., pp. 195–242). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cannata, M. (2010). Understanding the teacher job search process: Espoused preferences and preferences in use. Teachers College Record, 112(12), 2889–2934.
Caplan, R. D., Vinokur, A. D., Price, R. H., & van Ryn, M. (1989). Job seeking,
reemployment, and mental health: A randomized ﬁeld experiment in coping with
job loss. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 759–769.
Chronister, K. M. (2006). Social class, race, and ethnicity: Career interventions for
women domestic violence survivors. American Journal of Community Psychology,
37(3–4), 175–182. doi:10.1007/s10464-006-9017-8

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

617

Côté, S., Saks, A. M., & Zikic, J. (2006). Trait affect and job search outcomes. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 68, 233–252. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2005.08.001
Creed, P. A., King, V., Hood, M., & McKenzie, R. (2009). Goal orientation, selfregulation strategies, and job-seeking intensity in unemployed adults. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 94(3), 806–813. doi:10.1037/a0015518
Crossley, C. D., & Highhouse, S. (2005). Relation of job search and choice process with subsequent satisfaction. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26, 255–268.
doi:10.1016/j.joep.2004.04.001
Crossley, C. D., & Stanton, J. M. (2005). Negative affect and job search: Further
examination of the reverse causation hypothesis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66,
549–560. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.05.002
Curan, J., Wishart, P., & Gingrich, J. (1999). JOBS: A manual for teaching people
successful job serach strategies. Ann Arbor: Michigan Prevention Research Center,
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
de Meijer, L. A. L., Born, M. P., van Zielst, J., & van der Molen, H. T. (2007). Analyzing
judgments of ethnically diverse applicants during personnel selection: A study at
the Dutch police. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 15(2), 139–152.
Della-Posta, C., & Drummond, P. D. (2006). Cognitive behavioral therapy increases
re-employment of job seeking workers’ compensation clients. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 16, 223–230. doi:10.1007/s10926-006-9024-5
Derous, E. (2007). Investigating personnel selection from a counseling perspective: Do applicants’ and recruiters’ perceptions respond? Journal of Employment
Counseling, 44, 60–72.
Erdogan, B., Bauer, T. N., Peiró, J. M., & Truxillo, D. M. (2011). Overqualiﬁed
employees: Making the best of a potentially bad situation for individuals and
organization. Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 4, 215–232. doi:1754-9426/11
Foley, K., Pallas, D., Forcehimes, A. A., Houck, J. M., Bogenschutz, M. P., KeyserMarcus, L., & Svikis, D. (2010). Effect of job skills training on employment and
job seeking behaviors in an American Indian substance abuse treatment sample.
Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 33, 181–192. doi:10.3233/JVR-2010-0526
Franze, I. J., & Ferrari, J. R. (2002). Career search self-efﬁcacy among an at-risk
sample. Journal of Prevention and Intervention in the Community, 23(1–2), 119–128.
doi:10.1300/J005v23no01_07
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78,
1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. S. (1995). Getting a job: A study of contacts and careers (2nd ed.).
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Haase, C. M., Heckhausen, J., & Köller, O. (2008). Goal engagement during the
school-work transition: Beneﬁcial for all, particularly for girls. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 18(4), 671–698.
Hodges, N., Karpova, E., & Lentz, H. (2010). An investigation of women’s early
career experiences in the textile and apparel industries. Family and Consumer
Sciences Research Journal, 39(1), 75–89. doi:10.1111/j.552-3934.2010.02046.x
Huang, X., & Western, M. (2011). Social networks and occupational attainment in
Australia. Sociology, 45(2), 269–286. doi:10.1177/0038038510394029

618

Career Development and Counseling

Jaidi, Y., Van Hooft, E. A. J., & Arends, L. R. (2011). Recruiting highly educated
graduates: A study on the relationship between recruitment information sources,
the theory of planned behavior, and actual job pursuit. Human Performance, 24(2),
135–157. doi:10.1080/08959285.2011.554468
Johnson, E., & Lahey, J. (2011). The resume characteristics determining job interviews for middle-aged women seeking entry-level employment. Journal of Career
Development, 38(4), 310–330. doi:10.1177/0894845310372772
Kanfer, R., Wanberg, C. R., & Kantrowitz, T. M. (2001). Job search and employment:
A personality-motivational analysis and meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 837–855. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.86.5.837
Koen, J., Klehe, U., Van Vianen, A. E. M., Zikic, J., & Nauta, A. (2010). Job search
strategies and reemployment quality: The impact of career adaptability. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 77, 126–139. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2010.02.004
Kondo, C. T. (2009). Beneﬁts of job clubs for executive job seekers: A tale of hares
and tortoises. Journal of Employment Counseling, 46, 27–37.
Leasher, M. K., Miller, C. E., & Gooden, M. P. (2009). Rater effects and attitudinal
barriers affecting people with disabilities in personnel selection. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 39(9), 2236–2274.
Lin, H. (2010). Applicability of the extended theory of planned behavior in predicting
job seeker intentions to use job-search websites. International Journal of Selection
and Assessment, 18(1), 64–74.
Luksyte, A., & Spitzmueller, C. (2011). Overqualiﬁed women: What can be done
about this potentially bad situation? Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 4,
256–259.
McKee-Ryan, F. M., & Harvey, J. (2011). ‘‘I have a job, but . . . ’’: A review of underemployment. Journal of Management, 37(4), 962–996. doi:10.1177/0149206311398134
McKee-Ryan, F. M., Song, Z., Wanberg, C. R., & Kinicki, A. J. (2005). Psychological
and physical well-being during unemployment: A meta-analytic study. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 90(1), 53–76. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.1.53
Nakai, Y., Chang, B., Snell, A. F., & Fluckinger, C. D. (2011). Proﬁles of mature
job seekers: Connecting needs and desires to work characteristics. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 32, 155–172. doi:10.1002/job.697
Redline, J., & Rosenbaum, J. E. (2010). School job placement: Can it avoid reproducing
social inequities? Teachers College Record, 112(3), 843–875.
Rutter, M. E., & Jones, J. V. (2007). The job club redux: A step forward in addressing
the career development needs of counselor education students. Career Development
Quarterly, 55, 280–288.
Saks, A. M. (2006). Multiple predictors and criteria of job search success. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 68, 400–415. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2005.10.001
Selden, S., & Orenstein, J. (2011). Government e-recruiting web sites: The inﬂuence
of e-recruitment content and usability on recruiting and hiring outcomes in US
state governments. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 19(1), 31–49.
Shirom, A., Vinokur, A., & Price, R. (2008). Self-efﬁcacy as a moderator of the effects
of job-search workshops on re-employment: A ﬁeld experiment. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 38(7), 1778–1804.

Interventions to Aid Job Finding and Choice Implementation

619

Slebarska, K., Moser, K., & Gunnesch-Luca, G. (2009). Unemployment, social
support, individual resources, and job search behavior. Journal of Employment
Counseling, 46, 159–170.
Tomasik, M., Hardy, S., Haase, C. M., & Heckhausen, J. (2009). Adaptive adjustment
of vocational aspirations of German youths during the transition to work. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 74, 38–46. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2008.10.003
Toporek, R. L., & Flamer, C. (2009). The résumé’s secret identity: A tool for narrative
exploration in multicultural career counseling. Journal of Employment Counseling,
46, 4–17.
Try, S. (2005). The use of job search strategies among university graduates. Journal of
Socio-Economics, 34, 223–243. doi:10.1016/j.socec.2004.09.009
Tsai, W. C., Chi, N. W., Huang, T. C., & Hsu, A. J. (2011). The effects of applicant
resume contents on recruiters’ hiring recommendations: The mediating roles of
recruiter ﬁt perceptions. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 60(2), 231–254.
doi:10/1111/j.1464-0597.2010.00434.x
Tso, G. K. F., Yau, K. K. W., & Cheung, M. S. M. (2010). Latent constructs determining
Internet job search behaviors: Motivation, opportunity and job change intention.
Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 122–131. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2009.10.016
Turban, D. B., Stevens, C. K., & Lee, F. K. (2009). Effects of conscientiousness and
extraversion on new labor market entrants’ job search: The mediating role of
metacognitive activities and positive emotions. Personnel Psychology, 62, 553–573.
Tyler, J. M., & McCullough, J. D. (2009). Violating prescriptive stereotypes on job
resumes: A self-presentational perspective. Management Communication Quarterly,
23(2), 272–287. doi:10.1177/089331890341412
Van Hooft, E. A. J., Born, M. P., Taris, T. W., & van der Flier, H. (2005). Predictors
and outcomes of job search behavior: The moderating effects of gender and family
situation. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67, 133–152. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.11.005
Van Hooft, E. A. J., & Crossley, C. D. (2008). The joint role of locus of control
and perceived ﬁnancial need in job search. International Journal of Selection and
Assessment, 16(3), 258–271.
Van Hooft, E. A. J., & De Jong, M. (2009). Predicting job seeking for temporary
employment using the theory of planned behaviour: The moderating role of individualism and collectivism. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
82, 295–316. doi:10.13-48/096317908X325322
Van Hooft, E. A. J., & Noordzij, G. (2009). The effects of goal orientation on job
search and reemployment: A ﬁeld experiment among unemployed job seekers.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(6), 1581–1590. doi:10.1037/a0017592
Van Hoye, G., & Saks, A. M. (2008). Job search as goal-directed behavior: Objectives and methods. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73, 358–367. doi:10.1016/j.jvb
.2008.07.003
Van Hoye, G., van Hooft, E. A. J., & Lievens, F. (2009). Networking as a job search
behavior: A social network perspective. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 82, 661–682. doi:10.1348/096317908X36067S
Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, W., De Witte, H., & Feather, N. T. (2005). Understanding unemployed people’s job search behavior, unemployment experience and

620

Career Development and Counseling

well-being: A comparison of expectancy-value theory and self-determination theory. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 269–287. doi:10.1348/014466604X17641
Vuori, J., Price, R. H., Mutanen, P., & Malmberg-Heimonen, I. (2005). Effective group
training techniques in job-search training. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology,
10(3), 261–275. doi:10.1037/1076-8998.10.3.261
Vuori, J., & Silvonen, J. (2005). The beneﬁts of a preventative job search program on
re-employment and mental health at 2-year follow-up. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 78, 43–52. doi:10.1348/096317904X23790
Vuori, J., & Vinokur, A. D. (2005). Job-search preparedness as a mediator of the
effects of the Työhön Job Search Intervention on re-employment and mental
health. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 275–291. doi:10.1002/job.308
Wanberg, C. R., Glomb, T. M., Song, Z., & Sorenson, S. (2005). Job-search persistence during unemployment: A 10-wave longitudinal study. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 90(3), 411–430. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.3.411
Wanberg, C. R., Hough, L. M., & Song, Z. (2002). Predictive validity of a multidisciplinary model of reemployment success. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,
1100–1120.
Wanberg, C. R., Zhu, J., & Van Hooft, E. A. J. (2010). The job search grind: Perceived
progress, self-reactions, and self-regulation of search effort. Academy Management
Journal, 53(4), 788–807.
Willis, L., & Wilkie, L. (2009). Digital career portfolios: Expanding institutional
opportunities. Journal of Employment Counseling, 46, 73–81.
Zikic, J., & Saks, A. M. (2009). Job search and social cognitive theory: The role of
career-relevant activities. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 117–127. doi:10.1016/
j.jvb.2008.11.001

C H A P T E R 22

Promoting Work Satisfaction
and Performance
ROBERT W. LENT AND STEVEN D. BROWN

P

EOPLE WORK FOR MANY reasons and differ in the rewards they receive from

their work (Blustein, 2006; Lent & Brown, Chapter 1, this volume),
yet they generally wish to be satisﬁed with and effective at their jobs.
Work organizations also have a strong desire to hire workers who will be both
happy and productive on the job. These two outcomes—work satisfaction
and satisfactory performance—have, understandably, been the focus of a
great deal of theory and research, given their profound consequences (e.g.,
emotional, economic) for both worker and employer. Although they are often
studied separately, they can be seen as representing complementary views
on effective adjustment to work. When the focus is on how the worker feels
about his or her work (including its conditions and rewards), the commonly
used term is job satisfaction; when the perspective shifts to the question of
how well the worker performs his or her job, we may speak about his or
her job satisfactoriness (Lofquist & Dawis, 1984). These language conventions
in the vocational literature imply that, as in any contract, it is important for
both parties to be satisﬁed—in this case, the worker with the job (and what
it offers) and the employer with the worker (and what he or she contributes
to the work organization).
According to the theory of work adjustment (TWA), the worker’s job satisfaction and satisfactoriness are, together, expected to lead to job tenure, the
length of time that the worker will stay in a particular job or work environment (see Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume). That is, satisﬁed
workers are assumed to be motivated to remain in their jobs. Likewise,
employers have a vested interest in retaining satisfactory (i.e., productive)
workers. The reasonableness of these twin assumptions is immediately
621

622

Career Development and Counseling

obvious. Imagine a work organization populated mostly by miserably
unhappy and poorly performing workers. Over time, one would expect
a great deal of turnover: those who can do so will tend to seek more
satisfying work elsewhere, and the least productive will risk losing their
jobs (or experiencing other negative consequences, such as frozen wages or
demotions, which may exacerbate their dissatisfaction).
Research ﬁndings generally support the expectation that satisfaction and
satisfactoriness should each predict job tenure (Swanson & Schneider,
Chapter 2, this volume). However, these relationships are complicated
by many factors. For example, some workers remain in unsatisfying jobs
because they perceive few good alternatives (e.g., given their age, skill set,
geographical location, family responsibilities), have limited support for making a job change, or fear jumping from the frying pan into the ﬁre during
difﬁcult economic times. Likewise, employers may either retain workers or
lay them off for reasons other than the strength of their work performance
(e.g., seniority, outsourcing, corporate mergers, plant closings).
Although satisfaction and satisfactoriness offer no unconditional guarantee
of job stability, and even though the world of work has been undergoing
dramatic change in recent years (Lent & Brown, Chapter 1, this volume), these
two outcomes are still considered important markers of work adjustment,
albeit with some key qualiﬁcations. In particular, although everyone who
works would most likely prefer to have a satisfying job, there are many
situations in which job choices are dictated more by economic need or
other considerations (e.g., family wishes, job availability, skill or educational
limitations) than by work enjoyment. Also, as noted by Super’s life space
theory (see Hartung, Chapter 4, this volume), the work role varies in its
centrality for different people. Work satisfaction is, therefore, more likely
to be especially meaningful for those who view work as among their most
signiﬁcant life roles than for those who are more psychologically invested
in other roles, such as family member or community volunteer. Different
people also hold varying standards for their work performance, with some
focused on doing the minimum required and others wishing to excel, either
for intrinsic (e.g., self-satisfaction) or extrinsic (e.g., pay) reasons.
In this chapter, we draw on a variety of perspectives—especially
person–environment (P-E) ﬁt and social cognitive career theories—that may
be used to help counselors conceptualize and assist clients experiencing
problems with work dissatisfaction or substandard performance. Although
our primary focus is on remedial counseling (i.e., where existing problems
have motivated help seeking), the practical implications we derive from the
literature are also relevant for developmental and preventive interventions,
that is, for promoting work satisfaction and performance proactively or for
nipping problems in the bud where they do occur. We divide the chapter

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

623

into two main sections focusing, respectively, on factors that promote job
satisfaction and performance. Within each section, we offer examples of
how the theoretical and research literatures may be used to inform interventions. Although we believe these literatures also have valuable implications for providing counseling aimed at role satisfaction and success
to students and to those engaged in nonpaid work activities, our primary
focus here is on adult employees who have made the transition from school
(or college) to work.
JOB SATISFACTION
This section (a) considers the typical ways in which job or work satisfaction
has been deﬁned and measured; (b) discusses major sources of, and theoretical views on, job satisfaction, particularly those that may have particular
relevance for counseling; and (c) identiﬁes suggestions for promoting work
satisfaction that can be derived from research and theory. Although the
literature on job satisfaction is voluminous, the limited scope of this chapter
requires a highly selective review. A variety of sources are available for
readers who wish a more comprehensive or different (e.g., organizational
psychology) perspective on job satisfaction theories and research (e.g., Brief,
1998; Fritzsche & Parrish, 2005; Locke, 1976; Spector, 1997). The approach
taken here is adapted from Lent’s (2008) recent review of the literature,
offered from the perspective of vocational psychology.
Deﬁnition and Frame of Reference
Because most people spend a sizable portion of their lives working, how
they feel about their work can be quite important to them, their signiﬁcant others, and their work organizations. For example, meta-analytic
evidence supports the popular belief that job satisfaction is related to job
success; that is, happy workers are likely to be productive workers, both
in doing the formal parts of their jobs (task performance) and in making informal contributions to their organizations (contextual performance)
(Fritzsche & Parrish, 2005; Judge, Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001). Affect at
work may also spill over into people’s nonwork lives (e.g., Judge & Ilies,
2004; Rain, Lane, & Steiner, 1991). In addition, job satisfaction may contribute
to overall life satisfaction, mental health, physical health, and even longevity
(Fritzsche & Parrish, 2005; Lofquist & Dawis, 1984; Spector, 1997).
Job satisfaction has been formally deﬁned as ‘‘a pleasurable or positive
emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one’s job or job experiences’’
(Locke, 1976, p. 1300). In simpler terms, it refers to the extent to which people
like their jobs (Spector, 1997). Common synonyms for job satisfaction include

624

Career Development and Counseling

work/job enjoyment, happiness, and well-being. Although its basic deﬁnition
may appear to be fairly straightforward, as we will see, job satisfaction
becomes a more complex matter when theorists and researchers need to be
more precise about such things as which aspects of the job to focus on, from
whose perspective, and over what length of time.
Job satisfaction is typically assessed by asking for a worker’s self-report,
allowing the individual to consider and weigh whatever speciﬁc factors are
deemed relevant to their overall level of work enjoyment. It is also possible
to obtain satisfaction ratings through external means, for example, by asking
Suzie’s supervisor, romantic partner, or coworkers about her degree of
job satisfaction. These alternative perspectives are useful for some research
purposes, but in most inquiry on job satisfaction, Suzie would be seen as
the key arbiter of how she feels about her own job or work situation; that is,
satisfaction is usually viewed as a subjective matter.
Overall Rates of Job Satisfaction
Perhaps surprisingly, when asked by opinion researchers, most people report
fairly high levels of overall job satisfaction. For instance, in a 2008 Gallup poll,
48% of U.S. workers reported being completely satisﬁed with their jobs, and
42% said they were somewhat satisﬁed; 7% reported being somewhat dissatisﬁed, and 2% were completely dissatisﬁed; 1% reported no opinion (http://
www.gallup.com/poll/109738/us-workers-job-satisfaction-relatively-high
.aspx). Respondents gave more variable responses, however, when they
were asked about their satisfaction with particular parts of their jobs.
For instance, over two-thirds were completely satisﬁed with the safety
conditions of their jobs and with their relations with their coworkers,
whereas less than a third were completely satisﬁed with their amount of
work stress or pay.
The 90% of respondents who were at least partly satisﬁed with their
jobs overall had dipped only slightly by 2011 (http://www.gallup.com/poll
/147833/job-satisfaction-struggles-recover-2008-levels.aspx), despite 3 years
of economic recession. Of course, responses to the 2011 survey may have been
affected by workers’ relief over simply having a job during the recession.
The percentages of those who were at least partly satisﬁed with their jobs
did vary somewhat as a function of demographic group membership. For
example, older, higher paid, better educated, and racial/ethnic majority
workers reported the highest rates of satisfaction—generally 90% or higher.
However, no demographic group that was examined reported less than an
82% overall rate of job satisfaction either in 2008 or 2011. Although it is
certainly a positive sign that most people in the United States tend to be
satisﬁed with their jobs, the 10% or so who are unhappy (including up to

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

625

18% from some demographic groups) constitute literally millions of people
who may, theoretically, be aided by career practitioners.
Global Versus Facet Job Satisfaction
The Gallup poll used about the simplest possible method of assessing job
satisfaction—essentially, asking people a single question about how satisﬁed
they were with their jobs, with two response options reﬂecting satisfaction
(completely or somewhat satisﬁed) and two others reﬂecting dissatisfaction (completely or somewhat dissatisﬁed). A similar method was used
when asking about satisfaction with particular aspects of one’s job (e.g., pay).
The only simpler approach would be to ask for a single ‘‘are you satisﬁed
or dissatisﬁed?’’ judgment. Indeed, for some reporting purposes, the Gallup
poll aggregated the two satisfaction response options into a single ‘‘satisﬁed’’
rating and the two dissatisfaction options into a single ‘‘dissatisﬁed’’ rating,
thereby dichotomizing workers into satisﬁed versus unsatisﬁed categories.
Whereas the Gallup approach may be sufﬁcient for purposes of a general opinion survey, most vocational researchers prefer scales that are more
sophisticated from a psychometric standpoint (e.g., use of multiple items
and response options, asking about satisfaction in different ways) yet that
are still fairly straightforward, brief, and easy to use. The measures they
use tend to assess either global or facet satisfaction. Global measures reﬂect
overall feelings about one’s job. Two popular examples include the Index
of Job Satisfaction (Brayﬁeld & Rothe, 1951) and the Job in General Scale
(JIG; Ironson, Smith, Brannick, Gibson, & Paul, 1989), from which very brief
(ﬁve- to eight-item) forms have been devised. The JIG, for example, asks
workers to rate their job using a variety of feeling-oriented and evaluative
(e.g., ‘‘enjoyable,’’ ‘‘good’’) terms. Facet measures assess satisfaction with
speciﬁc aspects of one’s job, such as the work activities one performs, the
rewards offered by the job, the nature of the work conditions, and the
people with whom one works. Examples of facet measures include the Job
Descriptive Index (Smith, Kendall, & Hulin, 1969) and the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire (MSQ; Weiss, Dawis, England, & Lofquist, 1967). They
naturally tend to be a bit longer (e.g., 72 to 100 items) than general measures
of job satisfaction because they cover more content areas, but briefer forms,
such as a 20-item version of the MSQ, have also been developed. Researchers
sometimes assess both forms of satisfaction or average together facet item
responses to yield a composite measure of job satisfaction.
Apart from the general versus facet focus, researchers must also decide on
the time frame of the assessment. Job satisfaction can be measured in terms
of how people feel about their jobs either over nonspeciﬁc time periods (e.g.,
‘‘most of the time’’; Ironson et al., 1989) or over particular time periods

626

Career Development and Counseling

(e.g., the past week, today). More immediate feeling judgments tend to be
easier to make and may be more likely to capture responses to particular
work events (e.g., conﬂict with a supervisor). Retrospective or indeﬁnite time
periods require people to remember or reconstruct how they might have
felt in the past (e.g., ‘‘let’s see, how did I feel about my work last year?’’).
Such summary judgments involve simplifying cognitive strategies that can
distort self-reports of past feelings (Kahneman, 1999) and confound people’s
perceptions of their jobs with their more general affective or personality
traits (e.g., general tendencies to be happy or unhappy or to see the positive
or negative sides of most life situations).
The Many Sources of Job Satisfaction—and Dissatisfaction
Job satisfaction can stem from many different factors. We consider here
four major views on the origins of work satisfaction: person, environment,
P-E interaction (or ﬁt), and integrative positions. The distinction between
these categories is not always crisp, particularly when the individual is the
sole source of information about self, environment, or P-E ﬁt. For instance,
in rating one’s work environment, the person is telling us how he or she
experiences that environment, which may or may not be consistent with
the views of coworkers. Despite potential overlap among them, it may
nevertheless be useful to present these putative sources of satisfaction under
different headings.
Person variables. This category includes personality and affective traits that
have been linked to satisfaction outcomes. Personality researchers assume
that job satisfaction reﬂects more global tendencies to feel or act in certain
ways, regardless of the speciﬁc life context. In this view, job satisfaction
may be less about the job than it is about the person—how he or she
generally experiences the world in relation to the self. In a meta-analysis,
Judge, Heller, and Mount (2002) found that three of the Big Five personality
traits (extraversion, neuroticism, conscientiousness) yielded small to medium
correlations with job satisfaction (see also Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11, this
volume). Other meta-analyses have found that the traits of positive affect
and negative affect were moderately associated with job satisfaction (e.g.,
Bowling, Eschleman, & Wang, 2010). Ilies and Judge (2003) reported that
29% of the variance in job satisfaction may be due to genetic factors, lending
support to the argument that ‘‘job satisfaction is, in part, dispositionally
based’’ (Judge et al., 2002, p. 530).
Job satisfaction ratings have been found to be somewhat stable over time.
For example, Staw and Ross (1985) reported moderate stability coefﬁcients
over 3- and 5-year intervals. It is noteworthy, however, that job satisfaction

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

627

ratings tended to be more stable when workers remained in the same
positions than when they changed employers or occupations. Other research
suggests that job satisfaction can ﬂuctuate over time and conditions (Judge &
Ilies, 2004), particularly when job satisfaction is assessed over shorter time
periods (e.g., on a daily basis). Moreover, situational and cognitive variables
have been found to predict job satisfaction independently of traits (e.g.,
Watson & Slack, 1993). Thus, the trait and heritability ﬁndings do not rule
out the operation of nongenetic sources of job satisfaction.
What might we conclude from a counseling perspective? Our main
interpretation of the ﬁndings is that job satisfaction is responsive both to dispositional and situational factors. If job satisfaction were only an immutable
quality of the person (e.g., people are born to be happy or unhappy), as some
writers believe (e.g., Lykken & Tellegen, 1996), then one would expect very
high stability of job satisfaction over time and despite changing contexts.
The moderate stability coefﬁcients—and the sensitivity of satisfaction ratings to work events, situational inﬂuences, and cognitions—suggest that job
satisfaction is potentially modiﬁable (rather than merely a matter of genetic
fate). However, efforts to enhance job satisfaction will no doubt proﬁt from
additional research on the speciﬁc pathways (intermediate variables and
processes) through which traits are linked to job satisfaction (Brief, 1998;
Heller, Watson, & Ilies, 2004).
Environment variables. This category includes a variety of work condition
and climate factors (e.g., social support, role stressors). Job satisfaction
has been linked to many features of the work environment, particularly
as people experience this environment subjectively. One inﬂuential view
is that job satisfaction depends on the degree to which people perceive
that their work environment provides a general set of favorable conditions,
characteristics, or opportunities to fulﬁll their values. Warr (1999) organized
commonly studied work characteristics and values into a set of 10 job
features (e.g., opportunity for personal control, supportive supervision,
valued social position, availability of money) that have been associated
with job-speciﬁc well-being indices. It is noteworthy that several of Warr’s
categories involve social features of work. Other writers have noted that work
environments offer opportunities for companionship, emotional support,
belongingness, and practical assistance (Turner, Barling, & Zacharatos, 2002).
Indeed, ﬁndings show that the perceived social climate of work relates
substantially to job satisfaction (Carr, Schmidt, Ford, & DeShon, 2003).
Many studies have examined particular positive and negative work conditions, such as supports and stressors. A number of distressing work
conditions—such as role stressors (e.g., role ambiguity, conﬂict, and overload), incivility, and harassment—have been linked to job (dis)satisfaction,

628

Career Development and Counseling

with some ﬁndings showing that such work conditions account for signiﬁcant unique variance in job satisfaction apart from affective dispositions (cf.
Lent, 2008). Organizational support theory (Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002;
Shore & Shore, 1995) offers a larger conceptual umbrella within which to
view supportive or hostile work conditions. Perceived organizational support refers to the degree to which workers feel that their organization cares
about their welfare, appreciates their contributions, and is committed to
them. For instance, the experience of stressful work conditions or unfair
pay may lead people to see their workplace as unsupportive, which, in
turn, diminishes their satisfaction. Perceived organizational support may,
therefore, be a central mediating variable that helps explain how diverse
work conditions affect satisfaction.
Person–environment ﬁt. Another perspective—one that has particularly inﬂuenced the thinking of career counselors—assumes that it is not the presence
of generally favorable job characteristics or conditions per se that leads
to job satisfaction, but rather the capacity of the work environment to
provide speciﬁc conditions or rewards that individuals desire, based on
aspects of their work personalities. This is the P-E ﬁt perspective on job
satisfaction. For instance, TWA posits that individuals will be satisﬁed to
the extent that the work environment provides a set of reinforcers (e.g.,
variety, autonomy) that meet their personal work needs/values (e.g., Swanson & Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume). Holland’s theory maintains that
people will be more satisﬁed when their vocational interests/personalities
match (are highly congruent with) those of others in their work environment (Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume)—for example, when an Investigative
type person works in Investigative type environment. Research ﬁndings
suggest that P-E ﬁt, as deﬁned by TWA and Holland’s (1997) theory, tends
to be modestly related to job satisfaction (e.g., Tranberg, Slane, & Ekeberg,
1993). It has also been found that value-reinforcer correspondence accounts
for unique variance in job satisfaction beyond interest congruence (e.g.,
Rounds, 1990).
An integrative perspective. A recent trend has been to develop integrative
models of work satisfaction that bring together person, environment, and
P-E ﬁt perspectives. Social cognitive career theory (SCCT), presented in
Chapter 5, is one such approach. SCCT includes a variety of cognitive,
behavioral, and environmental variables that are assumed, individually
and jointly, to promote job satisfaction. In particular, the theory posits
that people are likely to be happy at work to the extent that they are
engaged in valued activities, are making progress toward personal goals, feel

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

629

self-efﬁcacious at meeting their goals and performing their jobs, believe that
their work will produce valued outcomes, and perceive ample supports (and
minimal barriers) for their work behavior and goal pursuit. Research ﬁndings
generally provide support for the relations of these individual variables to
work satisfaction, and several recent studies suggest that the model as
a whole (or subsets of it) is tenable (Lent & Brown, 2006, 2008; Sheu &
Lent, 2009), though not all hypothesized paths are uniquely predictive of
job satisfaction in all studies. (See Lent, 2008, for coverage of additional
integrative models of job satisfaction.)
From a counseling perspective, research on work conditions, P-E ﬁt, and
social cognitive variables offers an important counterpoint to the literature
on dispositional predictors of job satisfaction. The dispositional research
produces a view of job and other aspects of satisfaction as relatively ﬁxed
(e.g., Lykken & Tellegen, 1996), whereas situational and cognitive approaches
encourage a focus on antecedents of job satisfaction that are potentially
modiﬁable via counseling or other means (e.g., self-help, organizational
interventions). For example, by setting and pursuing personal goals or by
identifying organizations (or niches within organizations) where they are
likely to ﬁnd support and a sense of reciprocated loyalty, people may be
partly able to promote their own work satisfaction—rather than merely
feeling forced to either ‘‘grin and bear it’’ or defect to a different job. This is
not to imply that everyone will be equally able to make changes in themselves
or their work environments to enhance their job satisfaction, but even small
exercises of personal control may be good for one’s morale.
Implications for Assessment and Intervention
It should be clear from the preceding review that job satisfaction is a
‘‘multiply determined phenomenon’’ (Lent, 2008, p. 475) in the sense that a
number of different variables contribute to its prediction when it is studied
in groups of people. However, when individual clients seek counseling
because they are dissatisﬁed with their job or career, our experience has
been that they often perceive a particular factor (or small set of factors) to
be at issue. They may be able to point to fairly speciﬁc conditions, events, or
relationships that they do not like (or that they may feel anxious, angry, or
depressed about) in their current work situation. By contrast, some clients
may have a difﬁcult time articulating what ‘‘just feels wrong’’; they may
experience job dissatisfaction as a vague sense of ennui or as a growing
conviction that their work has come to lack meaning or purpose for them
(Lent, in press-b).
In many cases, clients may enter counseling asking for assistance in
changing their jobs or careers. This is often a sign of work dissatisfaction

630

Career Development and Counseling

that has reached a point where the client feels that escape may be the best
or even the only viable answer. How the counselor deﬁnes the problem will
partly determine whether counseling is directed at environmental change,
self-change, or both. For example, will the counselor take the client’s desire
to leave the current job at face value or dig deeper to identify the source(s)
of dissatisfaction? Can something be done to manage the condition(s) that
seem to be behind the client’s dissatisfaction? If so, is the client likely to
be happy remaining in the current job—or is the P-E gulf just too wide
to be bridged?
As should be apparent, the ﬁrst step in counseling for job satisfaction (and
change) is to assess the problem carefully. How dissatisﬁed is the client and
with what in particular? Fortunately, the literature can be used to provide
a structure for assessing job satisfaction and its sources. For example, if
formal assessment is preferred, a very brief measure, such as the JIG, can be
used to gauge the client’s overall level of job satisfaction. If the counselor is
comfortable with a more informal approach, he or she can simply ask the
client to rate his or her current or usual level of job satisfaction on a scale of
1 (totally miserable) to 10 (totally happy). Although some counselors would
simply infer the client’s degree of satisfaction from information provided in
the ﬁrst interview, an advantage of obtaining numeric ratings as a part of
problem assessment is that they provide an explicit baseline against which
efforts to enhance job satisfaction can later be compared.
Where it is clear, either from the client’s presenting problem or targeted
assessment, that dissatisfaction is likely to be the focus of counseling, it is
useful to explore the source of the dissatisfaction and to ascertain whether it
appears limited to the current job situation or extends beyond it (e.g., poor
ﬁt with one’s larger occupation in terms of values or interests). Our review
suggests that most speciﬁc sources of work dissatisfaction are likely to fall
within several broad categories, such as environmental conditions (e.g., a
nonsupportive supervisor), cognitive-person factors (e.g., self-efﬁcacy, goal
progress), traits (e.g., negative affect), and P-E ﬁt (e.g., not getting what one
wants from work). Table 22.1 lists common causes of job dissatisfaction,
which can be used to structure the assessment process and to identify
possible targets for counseling.
Despite their placement in different conceptual categories in the table, it
is important to keep in mind that the attribution of the problem’s source
generally lies in the eye of the beholder. Although it is important to respect
the client’s point of view, it is also important to appreciate that this view is
usually not the only one possible. For example, the client may feel certain
that his or her supervisor is the cause of the client’s dissatisfaction when,
in fact, others generally ﬁnd it pleasant to work with the supervisor. Such
differences in perception may mean that what the client sees as a problem

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

631

Table 22.1
Common Sources of Work Dissatisfaction
• Environmental sources
◦ Stress
◦ Role conﬂict (e.g., work/family, dual career), ambiguity, or overload
◦ Interpersonal conﬂict, adverse social climate
◦ Harassment
◦ Incivility
◦ Discrimination
◦ Amount of support from supervisor, co-workers, larger organization for P’s goals,

personal growth, or well-being
◦ Barriers to career or goal progress
◦ Amount of opportunity to engage in personally valued (meaningful) work activities
◦ Job characteristics (e.g., low skill variety, task signiﬁcance, autonomy)
• Person sources
◦ Affective and personality dispositions
• Negative affect and neuroticism
• Positive affect and extraversion
• Conscientiousness
◦ Cognitive-person variables
• Self-efﬁcacy regarding job tasks and personal goals
• Outcome expectations regarding work conditions and rewards
• Goals (e.g., progress toward central goals)
• Person–Environment ﬁt
◦ Interests
• Congruence between P and occupation in measured interests (Holland)
◦ Values
• Correspondence between P and occupation in measured values (TWA)
• Perceived ﬁt between what P wants and what the job supplies
◦ Abilities
• Perceived ﬁt between P’s abilities and the ability demands of the job
◦ Other or multiple P-E ﬁt dimensions
• Perceived ﬁt of P to the job, work organization, work group, or supervisor in

terms of values, goals, personality, and/or interpersonal compatibility

with the work environment could also be viewed as a matter of P-E ﬁt
(e.g., the client’s difﬁculty interacting with the supervisor around particular
issues). We ﬁnd it helpful, like most counselors, to start off by exploring the
client’s perspective. But it can also be invaluable to seek additional sources
of information that can support, challenge, or broaden that perspective.
For example, the client can be encouraged to discuss with coworkers how
they experience or deal with a particular issue that the client experiences as

632

Career Development and Counseling

problematic. The counselor could also form hypotheses based on aspects of
the client’s in-session presentation (e.g., low affect, lack of assertion, difﬁculty
listening, lack of follow-through on homework assignments) that may be
relevant to his or her work relationships or experience of work dissatisfaction.
At the broadest level, work dissatisfaction is likely to be caused either by
the absence of something positive that the client wants (e.g., engrossing work
activities, better pay, fun coworkers) or by the presence of something negative
that he or she does not want (e.g., stress, role conﬂicts, harassment). The
client’s decision to seek counseling likely implies that he or she feels unable
to access the positive things or to neutralize the negative ones. To clarify
these perceptions, the counselor might ask the following sorts of questions:
(a) What do you want from your work that you are currently not getting (or
not getting enough of)? (b) What parts of your job or work situation do you
dislike the most (or even dread)? (c) How do you like to spend your time
when you are not working? How does your work life ﬁt with these other
parts of your life?
Although they may capture overlapping information, the ﬁrst question
is intended to help clarify needs or values that are not being adequately
met at work (e.g., insufﬁcient variety, growth opportunities); the second
and third sets of questions seek to identify negative work conditions or role
strain issues (e.g., overwork, interpersonal tensions, work–family conﬂict).
Yet another way to get at these issues is through a version of the ‘‘magic
question’’: ‘‘Imagine you were to wake up one day to ﬁnd yourself truly
happy at work. What would need to change for that to happen in real
life?’’ The responses to any of these questions could lead to more in-depth
exploration of the sources of dissatisfaction, conditions that exacerbate or
lessen it, and the usefulness of current coping strategies. Although clients
often provide a window on their primary perceived source of dissatisfaction
without much prompting, more thorough exploration may reveal secondary
sources of dissatisfaction and hypotheses about coping options.
Where a more structured or thorough approach is preferred, a facet
measure of job satisfaction, like the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire,
could be used to survey a range of potential job-setting-based sources of
dissatisfaction. To explore potential trait-based reasons for job dissatisfaction,
a simple, brief measure like the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule
(PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) can be administered. The PANAS
contains two 10-item scales that measure, respectively, characteristic levels
of positive (e.g., enthusiastic) and negative (e.g., scared) affect. Clients can
be instructed to indicate how they ‘‘generally feel’’ (i.e., without respect to
life context) or how they feel speciﬁcally, most of the time, when at work.
Once the counselor has integrated various sources of assessment data to
conceptualize the problem—and once the client and counselor have arrived

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

633

at a shared construction of the likely source(s) of the dissatisfaction—a
counseling plan can be designed to address it. The plan might include a
variety of options for the client to consider, such as (a) making changes
in the self (e.g., managing time differently to deal with work overload,
developing ways to manage problematic affective tendencies; Brown,
Ryan, & McPartland, 1996; Lent, 2004), (b) making changes in the work
environment (e.g., negotiating for more challenging work assignments,
ﬁnding advocates to redress unfair conditions), or (c) making a job or
occupational change. When none of these options is feasible (and if the
client feels that continuing to endure job dissatisfaction is a lesser evil than
leaving his or her current job), compensatory strategies might be considered,
such as increased involvement in nonwork activities that allow for personal
growth, valued goal pursuit, or social participation.
The approach we have described is largely derived from the literature
on work satisfaction and integrates ideas from P-E ﬁt theories, SCCT,
and more general cognitive-behavioral counseling theories. The methods
of other career theories presented in the ﬁrst section of this book could
also be assembled to inform interventions designed to prevent or treat
work dissatisfaction. For example, career construction theory (Savickas,
Chapter 6, this volume) could suggest narrative methods to help clients
‘‘edit’’ unsatisfying work stories and envision new scripts for more fulﬁlling
or meaningful work. The important thing, we think, is for counseling to
proceed from a reasonably thorough and shared assessment of the problem.
Where career change seems indicated, the typical methods of career choice
counseling can be adopted (e.g., see Whiston & James, Chapter 20, this
volume). Where job change (within the same career) is desired, the client can
be assisted with job search methods described by Jome and Phillips (Chapter
21, this volume). However, in such cases, it may still be valuable to explore
and deal with sources of dissatisfaction (e.g., affective traits, unreliable
coping methods) that may follow the client to a new job or career path.

WORK SATISFACTORINESS OR PERFORMANCE
We turn now to a discussion of satisfaction from the perspective of the work
organization, that is, to the employee’s satisfactoriness in performing his or
her work roles. Counselors working with adults frequently encounter clients
seeking help with problems that involve job performance. Such problems
may be a client’s primary reason for entering counseling (perhaps to stave off
an impending job loss or to deal with blocked advancement opportunities)
or may be contributory to, or exacerbated by, other presenting concerns
(e.g., depression). The primary purposes of this section are to summarize

634

Career Development and Counseling

relevant research and theory and to draw implications for promoting work
performance. As in the satisfaction section of this chapter, we begin by
considering key ways that job satisfactoriness has been deﬁned and measured and then turn to a discussion of major sources of satisfactoriness,
drawing on theoretical perspectives that are relevant to career counseling.
Finally, we summarize counseling implications that may be derived from
research and theory.
Deﬁnition and Frame of Reference
Job satisfactoriness refers to the organization’s satisfaction with the employee
and is assessed in most organizations by supervisor performance appraisals.
Although research on job satisfactoriness typically uses standardized measures like the Minnesota Satisfactoriness Scales (MSS; Carlson, Dawis,
England, & Lofquist, 1963), most employers have their own performance
appraisal systems that reﬂect their focus on particular work tasks and performance criteria. Poor appraisals from an employing organization may lead
people to seek help from a counselor or, in some cases (especially with
managers and executives), to assignments to work with a job coach.
Work or job performance is a related but broader term that refers to
the adequacy with which a person fulﬁlls his or her job-speciﬁc tasks
or other behaviors that contribute to the organization. Research on work
performance often uses supervisor appraisals to index employees’ levels
of work performance but may also include other types of measures (e.g.,
job simulations and work sample tests, records of customer satisfaction or
complaints, measures of productivity, job knowledge tests, and measures of
performance in training). Work performance has historically been a major
focus of research in industrial/organizational psychology and has greatly
informed understanding of employee satisfactoriness.
It is possible to differentiate performance and satisfactoriness at a conceptual level: performance may connote objective or data-driven indicators
of role functioning, whereas satisfactoriness involves a summary judgment
(usually made by a supervisor) of the individual’s performance, taking into
account various (objective and subjective) data sources. In other words,
satisfactoriness reﬂects how happy the organization (or a representative of
the organization) is with the employee, given assessments of his or her work
behavior. These terms are, however, often used as synonyms in the literature
and, in practice, satisfactoriness and performance appraisal ratings may be
considered an efﬁcient way to index performance, at least from the perspective of the work organization. Because the distinction between the two is
often muddied in practice and because the larger literature on this topic
in organizational psychology more often uses the term performance (though

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

635

satisfactoriness remains popular with some in vocational psychology), we use
these terms interchangeably here.
The Multiple Dimensions of Work Performance
Job performance is one of the central constructs in organizational psychology
(Campbell, Gasser, & Oswald, 1996). Not surprisingly, a vast literature
focuses on the antecedents and consequences of job performance. Research
has recently produced an expanded view of work performance. Results of this
body of research have revealed that job performance is not a unidimensional
construct, but instead involves several aspects of employee behavior, all of
which may inﬂuence the performance appraisals of individual employees.
In other words, the question of how well a person does his or her job is often
not so simple; the answer may well differ, depending on which dimension
of performance one considers.
Task and contextual performance. Contemporary conceptions of work performance include two to four broad classiﬁcations of employee behavior
that contribute to organizational effectiveness. The ﬁrst, usually labeled as
task performance, focuses on how well employees perform the speciﬁc work
tasks prescribed by their jobs or job descriptions (e.g., selling, teaching,
writing, plumbing). Task performance, which reﬂects the common image of
what people do when they are at work, has been a major focus of research
since the beginning of organizational psychology and has been shown to
be an important factor underlying performance appraisals (e.g., Rotundo &
Sackett, 2002).
Organizational psychology scholars have, in more recent years, recognized
the importance of employee behaviors that are not strictly prescribed by job
descriptions but that nevertheless contribute to organizational effectiveness
by enhancing the psychological and social context in which work occurs (Katz
& Kahn, 1978). These extra-role, beyond the call of duty behaviors—typically
labeled contextual performance (CP) or organizational citizenship behaviors (OCB)
(Borman & Motowidlo, 1993, 1997; Organ, 1988, 1997; Smith, Organ, & Near,
1983)—include helping and cooperating with others, volunteering to do
more than the minimum required in the job, following procedures even when
personally inconvenient, persisting to accomplish tasks, and defending and
supporting the organization’s objectives (Borman & Motowidlo, 1993).
Borman (2004) suggested that the various OCB behaviors can be subclassiﬁed within a three-category system. The ﬁrst OCB category, personal support,
describes behaviors that are intended to facilitate coworker performance
and includes helping others by offering suggestions, teaching skills, assisting on tasks, and providing emotional support. This category also includes

636

Career Development and Counseling

cooperative behaviors (e.g., accepting suggestions, putting team needs ahead
of one’s own needs) and courteous behaviors (e.g., showing consideration
and conﬁdence in others). The second OCB category, organizational support,
involves behaviors aimed at the organization rather than individual employees. Such behaviors include representing the organization favorably and
promoting its public image, showing loyalty despite temporary hardships,
supporting the organization’s mission and objectives, complying with organizational rules, and suggesting improvements. The third OCB category,
conscientious initiative, includes behaviors that are less interpersonally or
organizationally directed but that show effort and initiative on the part of
the employee (e.g., persisting on difﬁcult tasks, taking on extra work to
get the job done, ﬁnding additional work to do when one’s own tasks are
completed, and taking the initiative to develop new knowledge and skills).
Similar taxonomies focus on the value of both interpersonally and organizationally directed citizenship behaviors. For example, Organ and colleagues
(e.g., Organ & Paine, 1999; Smith et al., 1983) suggest that prosocial behaviors
directed at other individual employees (OCB-I) and those directed at the
organization as a whole (OCB-O) represent conceptually and empirically distinct types of organizational citizenship behavior. The former (OCB-I), like
Borman’s personal support dimension, generally involve cooperating with
and helping others, being courteous to fellow employees, and displaying an
altruistic attitude to others in the organization. The latter (OCB-O), similar to
Borman’s organizational support dimension, are deﬁned as behaviors that
demonstrate identiﬁcation with and allegiance to the organization, defend
the organization against threats, and endorse and support the organization’s
objectives (e.g., Borman & Motowidlo, 1993; Graham, 1991).
Both types of OCBs (in addition to behaviors involving conscientious initiative) have been hypothesized to contribute to the performance appraisals
of employees, above and beyond their task performance. In the case of
OCB-I, it has been suggested that a reciprocity norm may operate between
supervisor and subordinate. For example, employees who perform these
types of citizenship behaviors (e.g., helping a worker who has fallen behind
on a task) often free up supervisors’ time to work on other important tasks.
As a result, supervisors may reciprocate this help by providing positive
performance appraisals. OCB-O may form an important aspect of performance appraisals, especially today when perceptions of commitment to
organizations seem to be declining (e.g., Johnson, 2005), by demonstrating
to managers and supervisors loyalty and commitment to the organization.
OCB researchers have noted that the current economic environment
requires organizations to be ﬂexible and able to adapt quickly to changing local, national, and worldwide trends to improve their products and
services and remain competitive in the global marketplace (e.g., Jelinek &

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

637

Schoonhoven, 1993). Accordingly, scholars have begun to recognize that
another type of OCB may contribute signiﬁcantly to the productivity or
efﬁciency of work organizations. Called voice behaviors by Van Dyne and
LePine (1998), this type of OCB includes ‘‘making innovative suggestions
for change and recommending modiﬁcations to standard procedures even
when others disagree’’ (p. 109), challenging the status quo, and promoting
change in the organization. There are several reasons that voice may contribute to performance appraisals independent of both task performance and
other types of organizational citizenship behavior. First, as suggested earlier,
employee voice may be seen as integral to initiating the types of changes and
adaptability required in today’s business climate. Second, employees who
provide valuable suggestions to managers on how to improve the organization are likely to help managers be more successful in their own jobs. Third,
voice behaviors may be seen as a reﬂection of the employee’s commitment
to the organization, much like OCB-O type behaviors.
Counterproductive behaviors. A third set of employee behaviors has also
been seen as contributing to performance appraisals separately from task
and contextual performance but in the opposite direction—counterproductive
work behaviors (CWB). CWB involves voluntary behaviors that harm the
well-being of the organization (Rotundo & Sackett, 2002) and negatively
affect an organization’s productivity and culture. Examples of CWB behaviors that have been studied include (a) personally deviant behaviors (e.g.,
substance and alcohol abuse, other illegal behaviors), (b) destructive or hazardous behaviors (e.g., violating security and safety, destroying equipment),
(c) aggression and unruliness (e.g., actions that harm other workers, such as
gossiping and spreading rumors), and (d) behaviors that diminish organizational productivity (e.g., taking overly long breaks, being tardy, missing
work, sabotaging the work of others, behaving in an unprofessional manner
with customers).
Adaptive performance. The changing nature of the work world has also led
some investigators to posit that a fourth class of performance behaviors
may be critical in the current marketplace and that supervisors may also
consider these behaviors when making performance appraisals. Called adaptive performance (e.g., Pulakos, Arad, Donovan, & Plamondon, 2000), these
behaviors include employees’ facility at handling emergency or crisis situations and work stress, solving problems creatively, dealing with uncertain
and unpredictable work situations, and adapting to new cultures. Adaptive performance is conceptually related to career adaptability (Savickas,
Chapter 6, this volume), career preparedness (Lent, in press-a), and similar

638

Career Development and Counseling

constructs that are of current interest in career counseling and vocational
psychology. Research on adaptive performance, however, seems to be less
well developed at this time than research on task performance, organizational citizenship, and counterproductive work behaviors and, therefore, is
not discussed further here.
Relations among the types of work performance. Researchers have examined the
relations among the various types of work performance to determine whether
they truly represent distinct psychological dimensions. LePine and Van Dyne
(2001) explored the relations among task performance, voice, and other forms
of organizational citizenship behavior and found that voice was sufﬁciently
distinct from other forms of organizational citizenship to warrant its separate
assessment in the study of work performance. However, studies of the
relations between individually focused (OCB-I) and organizationally focused
(OCB-O) citizenship behaviors suggest that they may not be empirically
distinguishable when assessed from the perspective of supervisors. LePine,
Erez, and Johnson (2002) found large meta-analytic correlations among
measures of OCB-I and OCB-O. They also found that potential antecedents
of OCB (e.g., job satisfaction) produced similar relations to OCB-I and
OCB-O behaviors. Together, these results suggest that OCB-I and OCB-O
behaviors may form a single underlying psychological construct. Whether
they are considered as distinct manifestations of OCB or as a single category,
an adequate understanding of clients’ organizational citizenship behavior
may require exploration of his or her interactions with fellow employees,
contributions to the organization’s culture and objectives, and voice (or
demonstration of independent initiative) in the organization.
Research has also shown that counterproductive work behavior is empirically distinguishable from the other forms of work performance. Dalal (2005),
for example, reported only moderately sized meta-analytic correlations
between measures of organizational citizenship behaviors and counterproductive work behaviors. Understandably, prosocial behaviors are inversely
related to CWBs (i.e., those who demonstrate good organizational citizenship are less likely to engage in organization-harming behaviors). However,
the negative correlations between these two constructs are not so large as
to suggest that they are just opposite poles of a good-to-bad worker continuum. Others have found that task performance relates only weakly to
organizational citizenship and counterproductive work behaviors (LePine &
Van Dyne, 2001).
Types of performance and supervisor appraisals of work effectiveness. From a
counseling perspective, it is important to note that task performance,

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

639

organizational citizenship behavior, and counterproductive work behavior
all contribute to performance appraisals (i.e., ratings of employee satisfactoriness). Researchers have found that task performance and OCBs both
correlate substantially with overall performance ratings (e.g., .43 for task
performance and .41 for contextual performance; Motowidlo & Van Scotter,
1994). Counterproductive work behaviors seem to also contribute importantly to overall performance appraisals, apart from the contributions of task
performance and OCBs. In a study of performance appraisals in ﬁve occupational groups, Rotundo and Sackett (2002) found that task performance and
counterproductive work behaviors each correlated more highly with overall
performance appraisals (average rs of .50 and –.52 for task performance and
counterproductive behaviors, respectively) than did OCBs (average r = .29).
Finally, research has explored the unique contribution of employee voice,
as an aspect of OCB, to overall performance appraisals. Whiting, Podsakoff,
and Pierce (2008) reported that task performance, OCB-I, OCB-O, and voice
behaviors all explained signiﬁcant unique variance in performance appraisal
ratings. It is interesting that they also found signiﬁcant interactions among
these sources of performance appraisal, suggesting that voice inﬂuences
performance appraisals positively only if task performance, citizenship
behavior, or both are high. In other words, supervisors in this study gave
more weight to voice when employees were also contributing to the organization via acceptable task or contextual performance. Because voice behaviors
have the potential to threaten the status quo and engender organizational
defensiveness, it may be that employees who exercise their voice have
credibility only if they are seen as effective performers in other ways. Otherwise, supervisors and coworkers may take the position, ‘‘Why should we
listen to you?’’
In summary, the research in this area suggests that work performance
encompasses more than just task performance. In addition to how well
people perform the tasks that are formally required of them, performance
appraisals can be inﬂuenced by the prosocial behaviors that employees display at work, including the degree to which they cooperate with and help
others (OCB-I), support and defend the organization as a whole (OCB-O),
demonstrate conscientious initiative, and offer challenging and innovative
suggestions to improve the organization’s effectiveness (voice). Performance
appraisals also take into account counterproductive behaviors that detract
from or harm the organization. In terms of organizational citizenship, supervisors may attend to behaviors that challenge the status quo (voice), as
well as to more cooperative types of behaviors aimed at helping fellow
employees or promoting the organization as a whole. The impact that voice
behaviors have on employee satisfactoriness may depend on the other types
of contributions that employees make to the organization. Voice may not

640

Career Development and Counseling

be well accepted by supervisors unless employees are performing their job
tasks well or contributing in other ways to the performance and climate of
their organization. It is also possible that voice behaviors are more likely to
be heeded and rewarded if offered in constructive ways rather than seen as
rabble-rousing—a style issue that may be explored in counseling.

The Many Sources of Job Satisfactoriness—and Unsatisfactoriness
Many variables discussed earlier in this chapter as sources of job satisfaction
have also been found to be important sources of job satisfactoriness. These
include person variables, the work environment, person–environment ﬁt,
and various social cognitive variables.
Person variables. Certain personality variables, especially the Big Five trait
of conscientiousness (see Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11, this volume), have
been shown to reliably predict work performance. Several large-scale metaanalyses (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991; Salgado, 1997) have found that
employee conscientiousness may, in fact, represent one of the strongest
predictors of work performance for most jobs. Finer-grained analyses have
suggested that conscientiousness is an important predictor of task performance, as well as organizational citizenship behavior and counterproductive
work behavior (Chiaburu, Oh, Berry, Li, & Gardner, 2011). Some researchers
have also reported that other Big Five traits rival conscientiousness in predicting organizational citizenship behaviors. For example, Chiaburu and
colleagues (2011) found that openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness
were all good predictors of both OCB-I and OCB-O, while extraversion and
openness were good predictors of voice.
These ﬁndings suggest that work performance is partly linked to the
personality dispositions that people bring with them to their work settings.
For example, employees who tend to be cooperative (agreeable) and open
to new experiences and ideas (open) may be more likely to engage in
the types of citizenship behaviors that are seen as valuable in performance
appraisals. Similarly, persons who are relatively outgoing (extraversion) and
comfortable with change (open) may be more likely to effectively challenge
the status quo when such behavior is desirable. Conscientious employees
(those who are goal directed, organized, planful, and achievement oriented)
seem to have an advantage over less conscientious employees in most, if not
all, performance domains that are included in performance appraisals.
Another type of person variable, general cognitive ability, has been studied
extensively in relation to work performance. General cognitive ability (or
intelligence), which reﬂects the ability to learn new tasks (Schmidt, 2002),

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

641

is indexed by a variety of commercially available intelligence and ability
tests. It has been found to be a strong predictor of work performance
(see Metz & Jones, Chapter 16, this volume). Meta-analytic correlations
between intelligence and work performance are some of the largest that
have been reported in the literature and suggest that as much as 25% of
the variance in work performance is accounted for by employee general
cognitive ability, irrespective of type of job, though more complex jobs
seem to require more general learning ability than less complex jobs (e.g.,
Gottfredson, 1997; Schmidt, 2002). Intelligence also seems to be more strongly
related to task performance than to organizational citizenship behavior
(although it is involved in both), whereas personality traits relate more
strongly to organizational citizenship behavior (although they, too, especially
conscientiousness, relate to both; e.g., Borman & Motowidlo, 1993). General
cognitive ability appears to relate to task performance in at least two
ways, both directly (i.e., higher levels of cognitive ability enable stronger
performance) and indirectly, through the acquisition of job knowledge (see
Schmidt, 2002). That is, those with higher levels of general cognitive ability
learn what is required on their jobs (acquire job knowledge) more quickly
and easily than do those with lesser ability.
For a variety of reasons, the contributions of general cognitive ability and
personality to work performance remain sensitive topics in the counseling
ﬁeld. For example, counselors may lack clear guidelines about how to
approach variables that have a heritable component or feel that adherence to
social justice values is incompatible with acknowledgment of person qualities
that may be used to label people in negative, static ways or contribute to
their oppression. At the same time, it is difﬁcult to ignore ﬁndings that
general cognitive ability and conscientiousness each account for substantial
amounts of the variance in work performance (Schmidt & Hunter, 1998).
Hence, there remains a tension between, on the one hand, viewing ability
and personality as undeniable aspects of individual difference and, on the
other hand, seeking avenues to change features of persons and environments
that can enable people to lead more fulﬁlling work lives.
Environment variables. Several features of the work environment have also
been found to relate to employee satisfactoriness, most notably role stressors
and strains (role ambiguity, conﬂict, and overload), perceived organizational support, job autonomy, and organizational climate (Carr et al., 2003;
Langford, & Moye, 2004; Morgeson, Delaney-Klinger, & Hemmingway,
2005). There is also evidence that these environmental factors may be linked
to performance indirectly through the intervening variable of employee
satisfaction. This indirect pathway may be more pronounced in the case
of organizational citizenship and counterproductive work behaviors than

642

Career Development and Counseling

task performance (Eatough, Chang, Miloslavic, & Johnson, 2011). In other
words, employees who view their work environments as nonsupportive
(e.g., because they routinely receive ambiguous assignments or have low
levels of autonomy) are likely to become dissatisﬁed at work. Dissatisﬁed
workers are, in turn, less likely to engage in organizational citizenship
behaviors and more likely to exhibit counterproductive work behaviors than
satisﬁed workers, whose more supportive environments encourage goodwill
and loyalty toward the organization.
Person–environment ﬁt. P-E ﬁt has also been found to predict job performance as well as job satisfaction (see the satisfaction section of this chapter).
For example, Holland’s theory (see Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume) hypothesizes that work performance, like satisfaction, results from working in an
occupational environment that is congruent with one’s personality. Thus, an
IA person working in an IA environment will tend to like the job more and
perform better in it than a person with an SE personality working in the same
type (IA) environment. The theory of work adjustment (TWA; see Swanson
& Schneider, Chapter 2, this volume) also maintains that harmonious P-E
matches produce both worker satisfaction and satisfactoriness. In the case
of satisfactoriness, better ﬁt between the employee’s abilities and the ability
requirements of the work environment are assumed to lead to better work
performance. Findings indicate that both forms of P-E ﬁt (RIASEC congruence and TWA correspondence) are modestly related to various indices
of work performance and that TWA correspondence accounts for unique
variance in the prediction of job satisfactoriness beyond RIASEC congruence
(e.g., Dawis & Lofquist, 1984).
An integrative perspective. Social cognitive career theory’s performance model
(SCCT; see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume) attempts to integrate several sets
of variables that, together, are seen as promoting work performance. While
acknowledging various person, learning, and environmental variables that
contribute to performance, this model highlights the joint roles of cognitive
ability and work-related skills, self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome expectations,
and performance goals relative to work performance. More speciﬁcally,
SCCT hypothesizes that general cognitive ability and the speciﬁc work skills
that people develop (through prior mastery experiences and by observing
others) inﬂuence task performance both directly and indirectly via selfefﬁcacy beliefs. Self-efﬁcacy is seen as enabling performance in several ways,
in particular, by helping people organize and deploy their cognitive abilities
more effectively and form more optimistic outcome expectations (see Lent,
Chapter 5).

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

643

SCCT also posits that self-efﬁcacy and outcome expectations affect work
performance, at least in part, via their inﬂuence on the types of work goals that
people set for themselves. Persons with more robust self-efﬁcacy beliefs and
positive outcome expectations are likely to set more challenging performance
goals than workers with weaker self-efﬁcacy beliefs and less positive (or
more negative) outcome expectations. More challenging goals, in turn, are
expected to motivate people to work harder at goal attainment, leading to
higher levels of performance. In a meta-analysis of research on a portion
of the performance model, cognitive ability and self-efﬁcacy were found to
jointly predict both work goals and performance (Brown, Lent, Telander, &
Tramayne, 2011). When conscientiousness was added to the model test,
ﬁndings suggested that this variable related to task performance directly
as well as indirectly through self-efﬁcacy (presumably, more conscientious
persons may hold stronger beliefs in their work capabilities, which, in turn,
motivate greater effort).
Although SCCT’s performance model was speciﬁcally developed to
account for task performance, it may also have implications for understanding how much and how well people engage in contextual performance.
In particular, the performance model might be extended to posit that workers are more likely to perform extra-role citizenship behaviors when they
possess both strong self-efﬁcacy beliefs and favorable outcome expectations
related to these behaviors (i.e., when they believe they can perform the OCBs
successfully and that doing so will produce positive rather than negative outcomes). A growing body of research suggests that engaging in OCB, though
positively valued by employers, is not without its costs for employees; it can,
for example, be associated with work overload, job stress, and work–family
conﬂict (e.g., Bolino & Turnley, 2005). Some employees may, understandably, be reluctant to engage in OCBs because of such anticipated costs (i.e.,
negative outcome expectations may outweigh positive ones). Although there
is need to test the SCCT performance model in the context of organizational
citizenship, these speculations suggest the potential value of helping clients
to consider both the pros and cons of engaging in increased OCB.
Implications for Assessment and Intervention
Like satisfaction, job satisfactoriness is multiply determined. Thus, it is useful
for counseling aimed at performance problems to begin by determining the
major sources of a client’s lack of satisfactoriness at work. We typically start
by exploring the degree to which inadequate task performance, organizational citizenship behaviors (including voice), and counterproductive work
behaviors might be contributing to clients’ performance appraisals. We try
to determine whether clients are aware of the importance of citizenship

644

Career Development and Counseling

behaviors and other extra-role behaviors (e.g., counterproductive work
behavior) to performance appraisals. We have found that some clients think
that doing their ofﬁcial job tasks well is all that is required of them. Although
this might be an accurate assumption in some work settings, an exploration
of the degree to which extra-role behaviors are positively valued in their
organizations can be enlightening to clients.
One possible strategy for gathering data on task performance, organizational citizenship, and counterproductive work behaviors is to ask clients to
describe their past work day or week. Counselors can, for example, listen
for instances of citizenship and counterproductive behaviors and probe for
examples of each (e.g., What did you do last week to help a fellow employee?
How do you feel about your organization’s goals and values? What do you
do when you disagree with the direction your organization or work unit is
going?). Counselors can also develop checklists of potential organizational
citizenship and counterproductive behaviors. Clients can be asked to complete the checklist between the ﬁrst and second session, or the counselor
may present items orally to the client for in-session discussion. Table 22.2
provides a summary of behaviors that can be used to create such a checklist.
It may be also be helpful for clients to seek the perspectives of a supervisor
or trusted coworkers on their task and extra-role behaviors at work, because
external feedback may help clients to peer around their own blind spots. In
fact, in some cases, consultation with several other feedback sources may be
useful in creating a composite picture of one’s performance. To the extent that
perceptions of satisfactoriness lie in the eye of the beholder, and in situations
where work performance appraisals are heavily based on subjective data,
such interpersonal feedback may prove very informative.
This suggestion is similar to the practice of ‘‘360-degree feedback’’ in
organizational consultation, where, for example, performance feedback is
sought from a sample of a target individual’s supervisors, coworkers, and
subordinates or customers. If such options are pursued, it may be important
to discuss or role-play with clients how to gather and respond nondefensively
to constructive feedback. It may also be valuable to employ performance
instruments that closely reﬂect the actual tasks and organizational citizenship
behaviors of the employee’s work environment. A possibly less threatening
approach to assessment may be to rely on prior performance appraisals
that the client has received, possibly augmented by follow-up discussions
between the client and his or her supervisors to get a clearer sense of areas
for improvement and how they will be assessed.
We have often found it beneﬁcial to explore speciﬁcally the extent to
which feelings of job satisfaction might be affecting clients’ performance. For
example, unhappiness at work may serve as a negative motivational force,
contributing to diminished task performance, withholding of citizenship

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

645

Table 22.2
Examples of Organizational Citizenship and Counterproductive
Work Behaviors
• OCB-I*
◦ Helping others by offering suggestions
◦ Teaching others useful knowledge and skills
◦ Helping others to perform their tasks
◦ Accepting others’ suggestions
◦ Providing emotional support
◦ Showing courtesy to others
◦ Showing conﬁdence in others
◦ Being tactful
• OCB-O*
◦ Representing the organization favorably
◦ Defending the organization
◦ Promoting the organization
◦ Supporting the organization’s mission and objectives
◦ Complying with reasonable organization rules and procedures
• Conscientious Initiative*
◦ Persisting with extra effort when the task requires it
◦ Taking initiative to do all that is required even if not part of one’s job duties
◦ Finding additional productive work when one’s own duties are completed
• Voice
◦ Making innovative suggestions for change
◦ Challenging the status quo
◦ Recommending changes in standard procedures even when others disagree
• Counterproductive Work Behaviors
◦ Frequent absences
◦ Arriving late to work
◦ Gossiping or spreading rumors about others
◦ Behaving disrespectfully to customers or co-workers
◦ Engaging in dangerous or unsafe behaviors
◦ Destroying equipment
◦ Sabotaging the work of others
*Adapted from Borman (2004), Table 1.

behavior, or involvement in counterproductive work behaviors (e.g., frequent absences, tardiness, brusqueness with customers or coworkers). (Of
course, there may be bidirectional relations as well, with performance
problems serving to diminish work satisfaction, resulting in a negative
satisfaction–performance cycle.) Should lack of satisfaction seem to be
contributing to satisfactoriness problems, we typically shift our focus to
identifying the underlying sources of clients’ dissatisfaction and proceed
with counseling strategies outlined in the ﬁrst section of this chapter.

646

Career Development and Counseling

Where assessment results suggest that clients’ unsatisfactoriness is due
primarily to task performance problems, we try to ascertain the work
tasks that seem to be problematic for them, their abilities to meet task
demands, and their self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Should assessment results reveal
that citizenship behaviors are contributing to unsatisfactory performance
appraisals, we attempt to identify the basis for these appraisals (e.g., lack
of knowledge of their importance, negative outcome expectations, lack of
skill or low self-efﬁcacy beliefs at citizenship behaviors) and then proceed to
explore options for improving contextual performance in ways that parallel
the promotion of task performance. Strategies derived from SCCT or P-E
ﬁt theories can be used to target features of the client, work setting, or
their possible mismatch that, if addressed, could enhance performance (e.g.,
identifying and accessing desired organizational supports or reinforcers).
Where ability or skill limitations, in particular, are implicated, these can
be approached in several ways. For example, intervention could focus on
motivational variables (e.g., self-efﬁcacy, goals) that may optimize use of
one’s abilities (see Lent, Chapter 5, this volume). Training or continuing
education might also be used to strengthen or update work-speciﬁc skills
that can enhance performance. Especially when other options may not be
viable, efforts can be made to identify new job roles or tasks (either within
the current environment or elsewhere) that may better match the client’s
current abilities and desired level of effort.
Finally, it can be helpful to assess performance-related aspects of personality (see Brown & Hirschi, Chapter 11; Rottinghaus & Hauser, Chapter 17,
this volume) early in counseling. In particular, where clients score low
on measures of conscientiousness, the counselor can explore the degree to
which speciﬁc aspects of conscientiousness (e.g., lack of goal directedness or
organization, poor time management or follow-through) may be contributing to unsatisfactory performance appraisals. Although conscientiousness is
usually conceptualized as a cluster of traits in the personality literature, we
ﬁnd it useful to view it as a set of behaviors that, like most other behaviors,
can be broken into smaller segments and learned through observation and
practice. This focus on conscientious behaviors may be extremely valuable for
certain clients in that it frames the problem in motivational or self-regulation
terms that can be tackled via social learning strategies, rather than construing
it as necessarily a matter of static disposition.
SUMMARY AND TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
Problems of work satisfaction and satisfactoriness represent primary reasons for some adult clients to seek counseling. For others, these may
be secondary to their main presenting concerns (e.g., depression, lack of
life satisfaction). In either case, the promotion of greater satisfaction or

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

647

satisfactoriness represents an important goal for counseling. The approaches
that we have described in this chapter integrate ideas from organizational
and personality psychology research, as well as from P-E ﬁt and social cognitive career theories. All of these sources of evidence converge to suggest that
work satisfaction and satisfactoriness are multiply determined (and related
to each other). For this reason, it is useful to begin by trying to understand
the reasons underlying clients’ dissatisfaction or unsatisfactoriness and then
working collaboratively with clients to set goals and develop speciﬁc interventions. Although tailored to a given client’s needs, useful general strategies
include (a) self-change (e.g., developing better time management skills, displaying more frequent organizational citizenship behaviors), (b) modifying
the current work environment or P-E ﬁt conditions (e.g., arranging more
challenging work assignments or ones that require more or less interpersonal
interaction), or (c) pursuing counseling for job or career change.
REFERENCES
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1–26.
Blustein, D. L. (2006). The psychology of working: A new perspective for career development,
counseling, and public policy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. (2005). The personal costs of organizational
citizenship behavior: The relationship between individual initiative and role
overload, job stress, and work–family conﬂict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90,
740–748.
Borman, W. C. (2004). The concept of organizational citizenship. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 13, 238–241.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion domain to
include elements of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.),
Personnel selection in organizations (pp. 71–98). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1997). Task performance and contextual performance: The meaning for personnel selection research. Human Performance, 10,
99–109.
Bowling, N. A., Eschleman, K. J., & Wang, Q. (2010). A meta-analytic examination
of the relationship between job satisfaction and subjective well-being. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 83, 915–934.
Brayﬁeld, A. H., & Rothe, H. F. (1951). An index of job satisfaction. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 35, 307–311.
Brief, A. P. (1998). Attitudes in and around organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brown, S. D., Lent, R. W., Telander, K., & Tramayne, S. (2011). Social cognitive career
theory, conscientiousness, and work performance: A meta-analytic path analysis.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79, 81–90.
Brown, S. D., Ryan, N. E., & McPartland, E. B. (1996). Why are so many people
happy and what do we do for those who aren’t? A reaction to Lightsey (1996).
Counseling Psychologist, 24, 751–757.

648

Career Development and Counseling

Campbell, J. P., Gasser, M. B., & Oswald, F. L. (1996). The substantive nature of job
performance variability. In K. R. Murphy (Ed.), Individual differences and behavior
in organizations (pp. 258–299). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Carlson, R. E., Dawis, R. V., England, G. W., & Lofquist, L. H. (1963). The measurement of employee satisfactoriness. In Minnesota studies in vocational rehabilitation,
XIV, Bulletin 37. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Carr, J. Z., Schmidt, A. M., Ford, J. K., & DeShon, R. P. (2003). Climate perceptions
matter: A meta-analytic path analysis relating molar climate, cognitive and affective states, and individual level work outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
605–619.
Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I. S., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The
ﬁve-factor model of personality traits and organizational citizenship behavior: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 1140–1166.
Dalal, R. (2005). A meta-analysis of the relationship between organizational citizenship behavior and counterproductive work behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology,
90, 1241–1255.
Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H. (1984). A psychological theory of work adjustment.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Eatough, E. M., Chang, C. H., Miloslavic, S. A., & Johnson, R. E. (2011). Relationship
of role stressors with organizational citizenship behavior: A meta-analysis. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 96, 619–632.
Edwards, J. R., Cable, D. M., Williamson, I. O., Lambert, L. S., & Shipp, A. J.
(2006). The phenomenology of ﬁt: Linking the person and environment to the
subjective experience of person–environment ﬁt. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91,
802–827.
Fritzsche, B. A., & Parrish, T. J. (2005). Theories and research on job satisfaction. In
S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career development and counseling: Putting theory
and research to work (pp. 180–202). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Why g matters: The complexity of everyday life. Intelligence,
24, 79–132.
Graham, J. W. (1991). An essay on organizational citizenship behavior. Employee
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 4, 249–270.
Heller, D., Watson, D., & Ilies, R. (2004). The role of person versus situation in life
satisfaction: A critical examination. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 574–600.
Holland, J. L. (1997). Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and
work environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Ilies, R., & Judge, T. A. (2003). On the heritability of job satisfaction: The mediating
role of personality. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 750–759.
Ironson, G. H., Smith, P. C., Brannick, M. T., Gibson, W. M., & Paul, K. B. (1989).
Construction of a job in general scale: A comparison of global, composite, and
speciﬁc measures. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 193–200.
Jelinek, M., & Schoonhoven, C. B. (1993). The innovation marathon: Lessons from
high-technology companies. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Johnson, L. K. (2005). The new loyalty: Make it work for your company. Harvard
Management Update, 10(3), 3–5.

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

649

Judge, T. A., Heller, D., & Mount, M. K. (2002). Five-factor model of personality and job satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,
530–541.
Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2004). Affect and job satisfaction: A study of their relationship
at work and at home. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 661–673.
Judge, T. A., Thoresen, C. J., Bono, J. E., & Patton, G. K. (2001). The job satisfaction–job
performance relationship: A qualitative and quantitative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 127, 376–407.
Kahneman, D. (1999). Objective happiness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz
(Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 3–25). New York, NY:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations (2nd ed.). New
York, NY: Wiley.
Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences
of individuals’ ﬁt at work: A meta-analysis of person–job, person–organization,
person–group, and person–supervisor ﬁt. Personnel Psychology, 58, 281–342.
Langford, C. W., & Moye, N. A. (2004). Effects of task autonomy on performance: An
extended model considering motivational, informational, and structural mechanisms. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 934–945.
Lent, R. W. (2004). Toward a unifying theoretical and practical perspective on
well-being and psychosocial adjustment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51,
482–509.
Lent, R. W. (2008). Understanding and promoting work satisfaction: An integrative
view. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (4th
ed., pp. 462–480). New York: Wiley.
Lent, R. W. (in press-a). Career-life preparedness: Revisiting career planning and
adjustment in the new workplace. Career Development Quarterly.
Lent, R. W. (in press-b). Promoting meaning and purpose at work: A social cognitive
perspective. In B. J. Dik, Z. S. Byrne, & M. F. Steger (Eds.), Purpose and meaning in
the workplace. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2006). Integrating person and situation perspectives
on work satisfaction: A social-cognitive view. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69,
236–247.
Lent, R. W., & Brown, S. D. (2008). Social cognitive career theory and subjective
well-being in the context of work. Journal of Career Assessment, 16, 6–21.
LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). The nature and dimensionality of
organizational citizenship behavior: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 87, 52–65.
LePine, J. A., & Van Dyne, L. (2001). Voice and cooperative behavior as contrasting
forms of contextual performance: Evidence of differential relationships with Big
Five personality characteristics and cognitive ability. Journal of Applied Psychology,
86, 326–336.
Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In M. D. Dunnette
(Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1297–1349). Chicago,
IL: Rand McNally.

650

Career Development and Counseling

Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1984). Research on work adjustment and satisfaction:
Implications for career counseling. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook
of counseling psychology (pp. 216–237). New York, NY: Wiley.
Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1996). Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7, 186–189.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1991). Adding liebe und arbeit: The full ﬁve-factor
model and well-being. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 227–232.
Morgeson, F. P., Delaney-Klinger, K., & Hemmingway, M. A. (2005). The importance
of job autonomy, cognitive ability, and job-related skill for predicting role breadth
and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 399–406.
Motowidlo, S. J., & Van Scotter, J. R. (1994). Evidence that task performance should
be distinguished from contextual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79,
475–480.
Organ, D. W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome.
Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Organ, D. W. (1997). Organizational citizenship behavior: It’s construct clean-up
time. Human Performance, 10, 85–97.
Organ, D. W., & Paine, J. B. (1999). A new kind of performance for industrial and
organizational psychology: Recent contributions to the study of organizational
citizenship behavior. International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology,
14, 337–368.
Pulakos, E. D., Donovan, M. A., & Plamondon, K. E. (2000). Adaptability in the
workplace: Development of a taxonomy of adaptive performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 85, 612–624.
Rain, J. S., Lane, I. M., & Steiner, D. D. (1991). A current look at the job satisfaction/life
satisfaction relationship: Review and future considerations. Human Resources, 44,
287–307.
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review
of the literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 698–714.
Rotundo, M., & Sackett, P. R. (2002). The relative importance of task, citizenship,
and counterproductive performance to global ratings of job performance: A
policy-capturing analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 66–80.
Rounds, J. B. (1990). The comparative and combined utility of work value and
interest data in career counseling with adults. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37,
32–45.
Salgado, J. F. (1997). The ﬁve factor model personality and job performance in the
European community. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 30–43.
Schmidt, F. L. (2002). The role of general cognitive ability and job performance: Why
there cannot be debate. Human Performance, 15, 187–210.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods
in personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of
research ﬁndings. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.
Sheu, H., & Lent, R. W. (2009). A social cognitive perspective on well-being in
educational and work settings: Cross-cultural considerations. International Journal
for Educational and Vocational Guidance, 9, 45–60.

Promoting Work Satisfaction and Performance

651

Shore, L. M., & Shore, T. H. (1995). Perceived organizational support and organizational justice. In R. S. Cropanzano & K. M. Kacmar (Eds.), Organization politics,
justice, and support: Managing the social climate of the workplace (pp. 149–164).
Westport, CT: Quorum.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational citizenship behavior:
Its nature and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68, 653–663.
Smith, P. C., Kendall, L. M., & Hulin, C. L. (1969). The measurement of satisfaction in
work and retirement: A strategy for the study of attitudes. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Spector, P. E. (1997). Job satisfaction: Application, assessment, causes, and consequences.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Staw, B. M., & Ross, J. (1985). Stability in the midst of change: A dispositional
approach to job attitudes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 469–480.
Tranberg, M., Slane, S., & Ekeberg, E. (1993). The relation between interest congruence and satisfaction: A metaanalysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 42, 253–264.
Turner, N., Barling, J., & Zacharatos, A. (2002). Positive psychology at work. In C.
R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 715–728). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. (1998). Helping and voice extra-role behaviors:
Evidence of construct and predictive validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41,
108–119.
Warr, P. (1999). Well-being and the workplace. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, &
N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 392–412).
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.
Watson, D., & Slack, A. K. (1993). General factors of affective temperament and their
relation to job satisfaction over time. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 54, 181–202.
Weiss, D. J., Dawis, R. V., England, G. W., & Lofquist, L. H. (1967). Manual for the
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Pierce, J. R. (2008). Effects of task performance,
helping, voice, and organizational loyalty on performance appraisal ratings.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 125–139.

C H A P T E R 23

Counseling Adults for Career
Transitions
BECKY L. BOBEK, MARY ANN HANSON, AND STEVEN B. ROBBINS

O

N GOING SHIFTS IN THE condition of the U.S. economy and the job market

have compelled more adults to make job and career transitions.
Career transitions are becoming the norm, and counselors can play
a critical role in helping adults adapt and navigate successfully through
these transitions. To provide effective interventions, counselors must take
into account both individual and environmental inﬂuences. They can draw
from a variety of theoretical orientations to organize this information and
use available research results and recommendations from researchers and
practitioners to guide counseling of transitioning adults. In this chapter, we
review the following topics relevant to counseling for adult career transitions:
(a) the increasing prevalence of adult career transitions, (b) challenges unique
to different types of adult transitions, (c) some common challenges faced
regardless of speciﬁc transition, (d) the implications of current theories for
counseling adults in transition, and (e) research relevant to career transition interventions. We conclude by considering implications for counseling
practice with career-transitioning adults.
CAREER TRANSITIONS: A COMMON EXPERIENCE FOR ADULTS
Most adults can no longer expect lifetime employment within a single
organization or steady movement up a predetermined career ladder. Rather,
individuals will typically negotiate a lifetime of job changes, work task
restructuring, and employer demands for new or higher-level skills. Up to
80% of employees expect to leave their job for a new employer within 1,
2, or 3 years (Glassdoor, 2011). Based on results from the 2011 National
653

654

Career Development and Counseling

Survey of Working America (National Career Development Association,
2011), nearly half (45%) of working adults indicated that they will need
more training or education to increase their skills either to maintain or
enhance their ﬁnancial status during the coming years. Thirty-six percent of
these adults also believed it would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd a new job with their
current skills, given the current job market. Regardless of whether adult
career transition decisions are driven by personal choice, a rapidly changing
and unpredictable world of work, or some combination of the two, ‘‘the
need to change jobs or occupations multiple times must be considered the
rule and not the exception’’ (Ebberwein, Krieshok, Ulven, & Prosser, 2004,
p. 292). Individuals must be able to adapt effectively to the changing nature
of work to make successful career transitions.
Current market forces, opportunity structures, and technology also have
increased the need for transition counseling. A continuing rise in serviceproducing jobs and corresponding fall in manufacturing or goods-producing
jobs has concentrated employment opportunities in the service sector, which
relies on many part-time and temporary workers and has a large proportion
of lower-wage jobs that are routine and require lower-level skills. According
to labor market projections by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics (2011), food preparers and servers, cashiers, retail salespersons,
ofﬁce clerks, and customer service representatives will be among the fastestgrowing occupations over the next few years. However, these occupations
typically provide limited opportunities for adults to experience occupational
advancement.
Although a high school diploma granted access to a wide range of jobs in
the past, postsecondary education or training is now needed for more and
more jobs across the job market. Nearly two-thirds (63%) of projected jobs
will require education above a high school diploma over the next decade
(Carnevale, Smith, & Strohl, 2010). These jobs are in areas such as education,
health care, community services, STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) ﬁelds, managerial and ofﬁce professionals, and higherlevel positions in sales and food service. Further, jobs that require higher
levels of education will, on average, pay higher wages and provide a wider
range of beneﬁts than jobs requiring less education. For example, in 2008,
men with an associate’s degree or bachelor’s degree earned a median annual
income that was $11,696 or $39,032 higher, respectively, than those with a
high school diploma (Infoplease, n.d.). Women with an associate’s degree or
bachelor’s degree earned a median annual income that was $8,415 or $22,671
higher, respectively, than those with a high school diploma (Infoplease, n.d.).
Shifts in the concentration of jobs across sectors and education requirements also contribute to restrictions in advancement opportunities. With the
expansions of lower-skilled jobs in the service sector, declines in traditional

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

655

low-skilled manufacturing jobs, and the more professional, managerial, and
higher-level technical jobs reserved for the better educated, there are few
opportunities for workers to advance if they are in manufacturing or service
jobs and have only a high school diploma. Given that these workers generally
earn relatively low wages, presenting a ﬁnancial impediment to accessing
additional education, they can feel trapped. The prospect of making a career
transition, let alone an upwardly mobile one, can be severely constrained by
economics and the structure of the job market.
Advancing technologies continue to change the landscape of work as well.
Technology allows for continuous forms of production across the globe and
enables more routine tasks to be performed by computers rather than people.
Today’s work environments are often fast paced, and workers are expected
to be increasingly productive. In some instances, technological advances
also require workers to upgrade their skills in their current jobs or move
into different jobs for continued employment. Technology has also led to
increases in the use of e-mail communication, text messaging, teleconferencing, and telecommuting. These tools are used to different degrees by
different workers, but given their increased availability, workers must be
competent in using these tools to interact effectively with coworkers.
In sum, organizational downsizing, rightsizing, outsourcing, ﬂuctuating
markets, advances in technology, changes in opportunity structures, and
increased job skill demands have contributed to an uncertain work life for
adults, both those just entering the labor market and those with workforce
experience. This uncertainty, coupled with the career needs and expectations of adults, has resulted in more frequent and more varied adult
career transitions.
TYPES OF ADULT CAREER TRANSITIONS
Career-related transitions involve ‘‘change and adaptation’’ throughout the
‘‘unfolding sequence of any [adult] person’s work experiences over time’’
(Arthur & Rousseau, 1996, pp. 30, 34). For an individual, a particular transition may be anticipated or unanticipated and can be perceived as positive
or negative. Transitions occur in a social, cultural, and political context
and have the potential to impact individuals’ relationships, assumptions,
routines, and roles (Anderson, Goodman, & Schlossberg, 2011). Multiple
transitions can produce a cumulative decrease in well-being if an individual is unable to recover before another transition occurs (Williams, 1999).
The duration of time it takes to make and adjust effectively to a career
transition varies, depending on factors both internal and external to the
individual and on the type of transition. The transition process itself is more
complex than can be thoroughly described in this chapter. Bridges (2004),

656

Career Development and Counseling

Bright and Pryor (2008), Hudson (1999), Nicholson (1990), and Schlossberg,
Waters, and Goodman (1995) provide in-depth discussions of models of the
transition process.
The adult career-related transitions considered in this chapter include
(a) adults who have graduated from high school and are unprepared for
the transition to work, (b) adults who are currently employed and want
to shift their career direction (e.g., by moving up, down, or across) or to
enrich their current employment, and (c) adults who are not employed and
want to reenter the labor market, shift from welfare to work, or respond
to job loss. These three types of career transitions are the most prevalent
and have a wide range of potential consequences. These career transitions
also require varied degrees of coping and adaptability, and counselors who
better understand the contexts in which these transitions occur can be more
effective in assisting those affected.
Adults Who Have Graduated and Are Unprepared for Work
For emerging adults who have recently graduated from high school and
are looking for jobs, full-time entry into the workforce and adjustment
has become increasingly difﬁcult. Adults with only a high school diploma
experience one of the highest rates of unemployment, second only to adults
with less than a high school diploma. Further, a high school diploma qualiﬁes
these adults for only about a third of U.S. jobs, and these jobs have lower
wages and fewer opportunities for advancement. In a competitive job market,
employers are able to hire workers with more education and skills rather
than workers with less education and fewer skills at the same, or similar,
cost. Given these circumstances, high school graduates often struggle with
attaining economic stability and self-sufﬁciency (Danziger & Ratner, 2010).
These young adults also have less labor market experience, and experience
is preferred, if not required, by many employers. Work experience exposes
young adults to the realities of work, which can help them reassess their
own career expectations. High school graduates transitioning to work with
little or no work experience do not have the beneﬁt of that experience to aid
their work adjustment.
High school graduates transitioning to work may also have unrealistic
expectations. Some graduates think they have unlimited work options and
earning power, which can quickly lead to unfulﬁlled expectations. Others
graduate without ever having considered their future career direction and
become paralyzed without the tools needed to engage in their own career
planning. Many do not recognize the need for additional training and better
developed skills until they start looking for jobs. Further, once these young

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

657

adults ﬁnd employment, they must understand the expectations of their
coworkers and supervisors and learn about the norms of the organizations
in which they work. These early work transition experiences can foster
feelings of marginality and impede adjustment (Anderson et al., 2011). A
lack of realistic, well-informed personal expectations and understanding
about actions that support employability is a signiﬁcant barrier for high
school graduates to transition effectively into the workforce.
Employed Adults Who Are Shifting Career Direction
For adults who are currently employed in the workforce, there are a variety
of career direction alternatives (moving up, down, across, or enriching their
current employment) available for workers to transition into positions that
better suit their current needs and circumstances. Working adults wanting
to advance into higher-level positions or move up the career ladder are
looking to make a vertical move. Adults who want to shift to a different
but comparable position are sometimes looking to engage in a lateral move.
Adults who are generally satisﬁed with their current positions may still
want to enrich their work experiences or may recognize the need to develop
additional skills to keep pace with workplace demands. Adults in highstress, high-demand positions; older workers with shifting priorities; or
adults in the midst of organizational restructuring may want or need to
explore options for moving down the career ladder.
With increased job instability, working adults often confront both anticipated and unanticipated shifts in career direction (Danziger & Ratner, 2010).
Although moving up the career ladder or laterally to a different position
may be perceived as exciting opportunities, there may be concerns about
having the necessary skills to effectively perform the new job and meet
competing demands, as well as a fear of failure. Adults who are satisﬁed
with their current positions may have concerns about the skills they need to
keep their jobs. For workers wanting to move down, there may be a desire
for more work options, such as ﬂexible work arrangements, job sharing,
or phased retirement (U.S. Department of Labor, 2008) but concerns about
whether these are viable options in their organizations. There may also be
concerns about the ﬁnancial repercussions of shifting jobs. Mature adults are
more likely to consider quality of life or work–life balance and may want
to spend more time with family and on hobbies and less time on work. For
older workers wanting to shift career direction, there can be concerns about
age discrimination and skill obsolescence. Finances and health beneﬁts can
also contribute to delays in retirement or a desire for partial retirement (U.S.
Department of Labor, 2008).

658

Career Development and Counseling

Unemployed Adults Who Aspire to Work
Adults who are not employed and want to reenter the labor force, move
from welfare to work, or respond effectively to job loss generally face the
most challenges.
Labor force reentry. Labor market reentry applies to individuals who have
focused their time (usually a number of years) and energy on roles other
than that of paid worker in the civilian labor force. Both women and men
may desire reentry, but it is primarily women who consider reentry when
they are single heads of households, displaced homemakers, empty-nesters,
or married with children but seeking opportunities for additional fulﬁllment
or income (Padula, 1994). Men primarily reenter the workforce as veterans
after completing their military service.
For women, reentry may be motivated by vocational, family, or ﬁnancial
factors (Padula, 1994). Many women may delay establishing their vocational
role until after their children start school or grow up and leave home. These
women are often looking for a career and an opportunity to become more
ﬁnancially independent. Another reason for reentry among homemakers
who have primarily worked without remuneration to care for home and
family is that they become ﬁnancially responsible for themselves due to
disability, divorce, death, or other circumstances related to their spouses or
partners (Moss & Baugh, 1983). These women may never have anticipated
working outside the home, may think they lack marketable skills, and may
be unsure of how and where to seek help (Moss & Baugh, 1983).
Reentry women often have multiple responsibilities, including caring
for children, maintaining a home, and volunteering in the community.
They may experience role conﬂict and emotional distress as they attempt to
balance family demands and work obligations (see Vetter, Hull, Putzstuck, &
Dean, 1986, for a more complete discussion). Other common difﬁculties
include low self-concept, lack of conﬁdence regarding abilities, and relatively
lower autonomy and assertiveness than women who are already engaged
in careers.
For veterans, their top reentry priority is usually to secure employment.
The military provides reentry programs to service members, including
preseparation counseling and transition assistance workshops, but these
programs are underutilized (Clemens & Milsom, 2008). As a result, counseling professionals are likely to encounter veterans as they transition into the
civilian labor force. Available research highlights a number of career transition concerns for veterans including culture shock, identifying transferable
skills, lack of job preparation and job search skills, and ﬁnancial concerns
(Simpson & Armstrong, 2009). One of the most challenging concerns is

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

659

transitioning from a highly regimented military culture to more unstructured and individual-focused work environments. The loss or change of
identity from a ranked position to a work role may also affect a veteran’s
transition adjustment. In addition, it can be difﬁcult and overwhelming for
veterans to articulate how their military skills translate into skills that are
relevant to civilian jobs. Veterans may be unfamiliar with typical job search
rituals (e.g., resumes, cover letters, and interviewing) and job search strategies. They may experience unrealistic expectations related to civilian salaries,
given their education and experience, as well as the time it may take to obtain
a job. Financial concerns are another salient issue, as veterans wonder about
their ability to ﬁnd stable positions in a competitive job market.
Combat veterans and veterans with disabilities face additional challenges.
Combat veterans may experience challenges resulting from the consequences
of combat stress and trauma (e.g., posttraumatic stress disorder). Some of
these stress reactions include depression, irritability, difﬁculty relating to
others, anxiety, and ﬂashbacks, which can make reentry difﬁcult, if not
impossible (Clemens & Milsom, 2008). Veterans who have disabilities may
confront barriers related to perceived inability to perform job tasks, perceived
emotional instability from having a disability, lack of accommodations,
and a lack of technology that would allow for higher level functioning
(Ruh, Spicer, & Vaughan, 2009). Although veterans have career transition
needs, they may also need to address psychological issues that, if left
unchecked, could impede their career transition effectiveness.
Welfare to work. For adults transitioning from welfare to work, the objective
is to move from having ﬁscal dependency on state government to becoming
economically self-sufﬁcient through work. Welfare recipients transitioning into the labor force face a number of challenges. A study involving
750 employers in four major metropolitan areas highlighted that newly
hired welfare recipients tended to experience problems with child care and
transportation, contributing to problems with absenteeism, and problems
with turnover and job performance (Holzer, 2000). A welfare reform study
in Wisconsin identiﬁed additional barriers to economic self-sufﬁciency for
welfare recipients. These barriers include ‘‘housing instability or unstable
housing accommodation, providing care for a child or adult with disabilities,
and being victimized by crimes’’ (Alfred & Martin, 2007, p. 8). Other barriers
may include limited work and literacy skills, negative work attitudes, limited
work experiences, negative interpersonal interactions and behaviors, and a
lack of work motivation (Alfred & Martin, 2007). Welfare recipients who are
transitioning to work often experience high levels of ﬁnancial anxiety and,
upon entry into the workforce, tend to be concentrated in low-skilled and
low-wage jobs (Holzer, 2000).

660

Career Development and Counseling

Job loss. Adults can experience a host of adverse effects in response to job loss.
Job loss is associated with an increased likelihood of prolonged unemployment, fewer opportunities, and decreased wages (Farber, 2005) compared to
working adults. Adults coping with job displacement due to organizational
downsizing, restructuring, or relocation may have substantial periods of
unemployment, sometimes lasting years (Brand, 2004). These adults often
also participate less in social activities, which can reduce networks of people
available to provide information about potential employment possibilities
(Brand & Burgard, 2008). Depending on the type of job that has been lost,
similar job opportunities may be limited, and those opportunities that are
available may be incompatible with these individuals’ education or experience. For example, midlife adults who have advanced within a corporate
structure are ‘‘faced with the prospect of being unable to ﬁnd a position of
comparable status’’ (Aiken, 1998, p. 274). Given the competitive job market, these adults often face the prospect of temporary jobs and downward
mobility. In one study, unemployed managers and executives perceived
themselves as having constraints that included employer preferences for
younger, lower-paid workers and pressures to devalue or hide their skills
and experience to counter potential age discrimination (Mendenhall, Kalil,
Spindel, & Hart, 2008).
Job loss can also lead to compromised physical and psychological health.
Job loss is associated with increased anxiety, depression, feelings of isolation,
feelings of failure and rejection, lowered conﬁdence and self-esteem, and
stress-related somatic complaints (DeFrank & Ivancevich, 1986; Eby & Buch,
1994; Kelvin & Jarrett, 1985). In addition, job displacement is related to
lower levels of self-acceptance, lower morale, and greater dissatisfaction
with life (Brand & Burgard, 2008). The increased likelihood of marital or
relationship difﬁculties and ﬁnancial problems resulting from job loss may
also exacerbate these health-related issues.
As described here, adults may experience an array of presenting issues
as they navigate career transitions. Some issues are unique to the particular
type of transition; other issues are more common across career transitions.
In the next section, we highlight common issues that are especially critical to
making effective transitions.
COMMON ISSUES ACROSS CAREER TRANSITIONS
Adults in career transition range from young adults (ages 18–25) just entering
the workforce to mature adults (ages 45 and older) with a history of work
and life experiences. A focus on adults across the age spectrum is important
because they contend with many similar life and work context issues and
are often in need of similar types of assistance with career transitions.

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

661

Despite some issues (e.g., unrealistic expectations) facing younger adults
that are different from those of thirty-somethings (e.g., career stagnation),
and from those of mature adults (e.g., age discrimination, health concerns),
there are three major career transition issues that seem to be common for all
transitioning adults regardless of age: (a) conducting a realistic self-appraisal
of existing skills, (b) recognizing the need for career adaptability, and (c)
dealing with the psychological effects related to ﬁnancial difﬁculties and
job uncertainty.
An important issue that adults confront across all career transitions considered in this chapter is the need to identify current skills and, in many
cases, develop new skills. Many emerging adults who have just graduated from high school are inadequately prepared for work, lacking basic
cognitive skills and the skills that enable them to behave effectively in
work settings. They may also have a limited understanding of the skills
needed to be successful in speciﬁc jobs. It may be difﬁcult for these young
adults to realistically identify their current skills because of lack of previous
work experiences.
Adults reentering the workforce (homemakers, veterans) and adults
responding to job loss often have rich life, military, and work experiences
to draw from, but they may not consider how their skills can be deployed
in new work contexts. Homemakers, for example, may not see how their
numerous responsibilities and skills generalize to job requirements in the
workplace. Veterans may have difﬁculty articulating how skills used in
the military relate to the skills needed for civilian job options (Simpson &
Armstrong, 2009). Similarly, mature adults with a wealth of work experience
may not think about their skills until they have to search for a new job after
job loss. The accurate appraisal of skills, and subsequent skill building, is
critical to the development of a transportable, broad, ﬂexible skill base that
bolsters employability and eventual career success (Eby, Butts, & Lockwood,
2003; O’Connell, 2008).
Given the unpredictability of work and the personal life challenges faced
by adults in career transition, another issue of increasing relevance is the
need for career adaptability. Career adaptability is the ability to recognize
and respond positively to or ‘‘cope with changing work and work conditions’’ that emphasize the interaction between individual and environmental
contexts (Super & Knasel, 1981, p. 195). It is characterized by a high level
of reality orientation and planfulness. Career adaptability allows one to
engage in recurrent decision making throughout the adult work life and,
especially, to make new choices that ﬁt current circumstances (Anderson
et al., 2011). It also allows adults to approach career changes proactively
as they anticipate ongoing shifts in work and learn to assess their personal
contexts realistically.

662

Career Development and Counseling

A few examples highlight the importance of career adaptability for making
effective career transitions. Mature adults who experience job loss may have
received training speciﬁc to their jobs, but those jobs may no longer be viable
because of outsourcing. Their initial response to job loss may be to try to ﬁnd
the same job elsewhere in the United States, but this would be a maladaptive
response if such jobs are no longer available for adult job seekers. Adults
who engage in a more adaptive course of action by considering how their
prior training might be relevant to different types of jobs may have greater
transition success. Similarly, veterans reentering the civilian workforce may
be inclined to look for jobs similar to those held during their military service,
but this approach may severely limit the work options available to them.
Veterans who focus on how the competencies they developed during their
service could be used in novel work settings may better adapt to the change
in their work circumstances.
Financial uncertainty can be a critical issue for adults who are just entering
the workforce, those contemplating career shifts, and those who have lost
jobs or are reentering the workforce. In an effort to become economically selfsufﬁcient, emerging young adults must attempt to manage expenses against
costs and learn that ﬁscal responsibility is a constant challenge. With the
exception of those anticipating upward moves, adults considering a career
shift are often concerned about whether they will earn sufﬁcient wages to
meet their ﬁnancial needs when they enter a new job. Adults experiencing
job loss may also have a loss of income, and reentry adults may already live
with limited income. Decreases in income can have signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and
personal consequences.
Many adults do not have sufﬁcient savings to sustain them during periods
of unemployment. Without ﬁnancial security, these individuals experience
considerable stress about paying monthly expenses, affording health insurance, retaining their homes, and providing for the needs of family members.
Financial problems can be a major cause of family conﬂict and marital discord. People may feel powerless when they struggle with ﬁnances because
they have little control over their options. In addition, some adults are not
comfortable discussing their ﬁnancial situation and may be embarrassed to
divulge their limited resources.
The effects of job uncertainty can also be signiﬁcant for adults in career
transition. Adults who have difﬁculty ﬁnding jobs (as emerging or reentry
workers or after unexpected job loss) and those unable to change jobs because
of an unstable market may experience a lack of conﬁdence and self-esteem
and a fear of failure. Without sufﬁcient job qualiﬁcations, people can lose
conﬁdence in their ability to meet expectations and to succeed in the job
search process. With the loss of a job, people can experience diminished
self-worth and feel devalued as less productive members of society. The loss

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

663

of a job also translates into a loss of career identity and colleagues, which
alters an individual’s regular activities and social relationships. The loss of
social supports and daily routines may compromise an individual’s ability to
mobilize psychological resources. For people who have worked comfortably
in a job for years or who are reentering the workforce, the prospect of
entering a completely new position can lead to fear of failure because they
are unsure of their ability to adjust and perform different tasks.
When faced with unclear or inadequate skills, limited career adaptability,
and uncertain circumstances related to one’s ﬁnances and one’s job, the
ability to cope may be compromised during all types of career transitions.
To help adults address these common issues and other transition-speciﬁc
concerns effectively, counselors need to be prepared to incorporate pertinent
theoretical and research perspectives into their practice. These perspectives
are considered next.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES ON CAREER TRANSITIONS
Counselors have a variety of theoretical perspectives available to them to
enhance their understanding of adult career transition issues and guide the
process by which they assist adults in making successful transitions. During
the counseling process, the counselor’s ﬁrst major task is to organize the
complex, multifaceted information they collect from the client. Once this
information is organized, it must be put into a conceptual framework that
helps to identify the salient issues, desired outcomes, and plan of action. At
this point, the counselor and client must enter into a shared agreement and
commitment to pursue these agreed-upon actions.
Theory serves as the overarching framework by which counselors implicitly or explicitly organize information, create an explanation for the client’s
expressed and implied difﬁculties or desires, and determine action steps
(Robbins, 1989). Given the potential complexity of adult issues, counselors
need a coherent conceptualization of the salient or deﬁning constructs of
interest in clients’ lives, including both the individual and environmental issues that have implications for expected outcomes. Career and adult
development theories help to (a) identify the critical connection between a
counselor’s worldview and the actions taken to assist clients, (b) reinforce
the need for conceptual and practical consistency in action, and (c) integrate
career and personal issues in addressing the needs of adults in transition.
Here we provide a brief overview of four career development theories
that provide well-established and supported approaches to understanding
career development. The ﬁrst two represent person–environment (P-E) ﬁt
models, with an emphasis on the assessment and exploration of personal
and work environment attributes and the corresponding congruence or

664

Career Development and Counseling

ﬁt between the person and environment. The third is a developmental
approach, and the fourth has its roots in social learning theory. We also
provide an overview of two adult development theories. All six theories
lend themselves to identifying both personal and career issues and to
establishing clear, measurable client outcomes.
Person–Environment (P-E) Fit Perspective
Both the Minnesota theory of work adjustment (see Swanson & Schneider,
Chapter 2, this volume; Hesketh, 2000) and Holland’s theory of vocational
types (Nauta, Chapter 3, this volume) focus on the interrelationships between
personal and work environment characteristics that affect career satisfaction
and work productivity. Counselors have historically used assessments to
identify and match key constructs with the intent of ensuring appropriate
placement and training. The ultimate goal is to ﬁnd employment that
enhances both satisfaction and productivity outcomes.
The P-E ﬁt perspective emphasizes the importance of identifying and
matching key abilities, values, and interests with the attributes of potential
work settings and occupations. A critical issue in this process is the notion
of transfer of skills or of articulating skills developed through past work and
life experiences in the context of novel or alternative work-related settings.
This is critical to the success of adult workers who face the pressure of
entering the work world with limited skills, obtaining a new job after experiencing job loss, a dramatic revision of their career path, or reentry into the
workforce. Thus, P-E ﬁt theories can be used to help clients select potentially
satisfying and satisfactory work options by helping them identify their major
interests, skills, and values and then consider occupational possibilities that
match these characteristics. Each of the P-E ﬁt theories also suggests some
additional factors that may inﬂuence this matching process, such as client
and work environment ﬂexibility and the consistency and differentiation of
clients’ interest proﬁles. The reader is referred to Swanson and Schneider
(Chapter 2) and Nauta (Chapter 3) of this volume for more detailed discussion
of these factors.
Note that personal responses to a career transition may impede the
systematic analysis and execution of a career search plan using a P-E ﬁt
approach. For example, feelings of failure, reduced self-esteem, unrealistic
expectations, and anxiety associated with ﬁnancial and job uncertainty may
need to be acknowledged and managed. Thus, counselors following a P-E
ﬁt perspective must remain sensitive to these additional issues in working
with clients experiencing a career transition.

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

665

Super’s Career Development Theory
Super’s life-span/life-space career development theory offers another
approach to understanding issues facing adult workers (Hartung, Chapter 4,
this volume; Savickas, Chapter 6, this volume; Super, Savickas, & Super,
1996). With Super’s emphasis on the importance of the development of
self-concept, which changes over time and develops as a result of experience,
this theory complements the notion of lifelong career transitions. As adults’
occupational preferences, skills, and life situations change, understanding
individuals’ life stages and roles is critical to helping them frame their needs
and expectations. Within this theoretical framework, adults seek career
satisfaction through work roles in which they can implement and further
develop their self-concepts. Counselors can support clients throughout
this process by helping them elaborate their work self-concepts, exposing
them to information and opportunities for growth, and assisting them in
developing attitudes and behaviors associated with career adaptability.
Adult clients will be better enabled to address career concerns, including
the establishment of clear work goals and the skills necessary to compete
with others and identify and obtain desired work.
Social Cognitive Career Theory
More contemporary models of career development have drawn heavily
on Bandura’s (1986) social cognitive theory. Social cognitive career theory
(SCCT; Lent, Chapter 5, this volume) emphasizes motivational factors such
as self-efﬁcacy beliefs, outcome expectations, and goals to explain how
vocational interests develop, choices are made, and various levels of work
satisfaction and success are attained. SCCT offers at least two suggestions
for working with adults in career transition. The ﬁrst is that career possibilities may be substantially truncated by inaccurate self-efﬁcacy beliefs and
outcome expectations. That is, clients who underestimate their capabilities
(self-efﬁcacy beliefs) or have inaccurate or underdeveloped knowledge of
occupations (outcome expectations) may fail to consider occupations that
might give them satisfaction and success.
The second implication of SCCT centers around the role that environmental
barriers and supports play in the interest development, choice, and job
attainment process. Clients will be more able to implement their desired
career plans if they experience few barriers and seek substantial supports for
their career plans. As Lent (in press) argues, ‘‘matching’’ theories, such as
those represented in the P-E ﬁt perspective, must take into account the client’s
capacity to manage change and loss, respond realistically and proactively

666

Career Development and Counseling

to a shifting and uncertain work environment, and internalize a sense of
resiliency and purpose necessary to navigate painful and stressful transitions.
Taken together, these two implications suggest that in working with adults
in transition, counselors should help clients (a) gain a realistic appraisal of
their skills and abilities, (b) develop accurate occupational information,
(c) learn how to overcome or manage barriers to their preferred occupational
choices, and (d) build supports for these choices. Brown and Lent (1996)
discuss strategies that can be used in implementing these suggestions (see
also Lent, Chapter 5, this volume).
Adult Development Theories
Our discussion of the conceptual underpinnings for career counseling with
adult clients can also be embedded in the broader adult development
theoretical literature. Two theories that address potential personal and
career issues are Baltes’s (1997) selective optimization with compensation
theory and Atchley’s (1989) continuity theory.
Baltes’s (1997) theory holds that people engage in lifelong processes of
selection, optimization, and compensation (SOC) to maximize gains and
minimize losses, which are most likely to result in successful development.
In the SOC model, selection refers to developing and choosing goals, optimization involves applying and reﬁning means to achieve goals, and compensation
entails substituting other means when prior means are no longer available.
With a focus on proactive strategies, this model would consider it adaptive
to set clear career goals, obtain and invest in the means to pursue these goals,
and persist in the face of challenges through compensatory efforts. Individuals are able to develop successful careers and maintain high levels of work
performance over time by using SOC-related strategies that address shifts
in means, which may result from personal characteristics (e.g., decreased
physical strength or stamina), macroeconomic conditions, or other contextual circumstances. The SOC model adds to career theories by suggesting
that career development can be conceptualized as a gain-loss dynamic with a
focus on employing strategies to maximize work-related gains and minimize
losses. This theory offers a guide for counselors with regard to the allocation
of resources, given competing goals, and highlights how interrelationships
between personal and career domains and their respective goals are critical
in examining the allocation of these resources (Vondracek & Porfeli, 2002).
Although not as germane to younger adults, Atchley’s (1989) continuity
theory of aging observes that older adults strive to maintain their same
activities, behaviors, and relationships over time by adapting strategies that
are connected to past experiences. This theory describes how people adapt
to their situations and set goals via internal and external structures in an

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

667

effort to preserve continuity. For example, making adaptive or realistic
career-related choices is a matter of connecting past work with future work
within the context of personal ideas and beliefs and supportive social roles
and relationships. This theory reﬂects the emphasis on maintaining a sense
of meaning and stability across important transition points during middle
age (cf. Robbins, Lee, & Wan, 1994). As Robbins et al. (1994) found, goal
continuity—the ability to maintain a sense of equilibrium or balance as evidenced by an inner sense of goal direction, life meaning, and purpose—was
a critical mediator of adjustment as middle-age adults moved into alternative work settings from what was considered their primary careers or
jobs. Goal directedness also contributed to a person’s ability to access and
use necessary ﬁnancial, health, and social resources. Conversely, a sense of
discontinuity, or an inability to create and sustain goal-directed behavior,
is viewed as contributing to poor adaptation. The implications for career
counseling are clear: Clients demonstrating inability to sustain purpose and
direction during times of transition may not be able to access available
resources or use them in achieving a career plan. They may also demonstrate
decreased personal and interpersonal satisfaction.
RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES ON CAREER TRANSITIONS
Interventions are at the center of counseling adults in career transition, but
there is limited empirical research on the efﬁcacy of various interventions
for adults experiencing the types of transitions described in this chapter.
Although the literature provides suggestions for practice related to adult
transition issues, most interventions lack an evaluation component (Kerka,
1995; Whiston & Brecheisen, 2002).
Research Support for Interventions
The broader career counseling literature provides some information about
which interventions are more generally effective. There is research support
for the effectiveness of interventions designed to assist individuals with
issues such as making or remaking a career choice (e.g., results include
increased career decidedness and career decision-making self-efﬁcacy) and
conducting a job search (e.g., Job Club participants have job placement
success) (Brown & McPartland, 2005), but these interventions do not fully
address the multifaceted nature of transitions such as job loss or reentry.
According to Brown and McPartland (2005), the career intervention research
‘‘seems to treat all participants not only as if they are seeking additional
career options but also as if they are all seeking help to make an initial
choice’’ (p. 210). Efforts to empirically examine the effectiveness of various

668

Career Development and Counseling

interventions with adult clients who are experiencing different types of
transitions and facing a wide range of issues and challenges would certainly
help determine how to better meet the needs of these clients.
Likewise, the effectiveness of career interventions delivered via different formats has received attention but not speciﬁcally for adults who are
experiencing particular types of career transitions. For example, Whiston,
Brecheisen, and Stephens (2003) conducted a meta-analysis of studies comparing one career intervention format to another. The most robust ﬁndings
were that structured group experiences were more effective than less structured groups, that self-directed computer-guided interventions were much
improved with counselor contact during computer use, and that totally selfdirected interventions were less effective than most other delivery formats.
Robbins, Chartrand, McFadden, and Lee (1994a) compared leader-led
and self-directed career workshops for mature adults undergoing a career
transition. In this research, an AARP program was originally developed
as a leader-led, group-oriented, 7-week program using a combination of
minilectures, in-class group exercises, and homework assignments. Robbins,
Chartrand, and colleagues (1994a) evaluated this program, then modiﬁed it
into a self-directed and self-paced program, and compared the differential
effects of leader-led and self-directed programs. They found that the career
workshops were highly regarded and resulted in knowledge and behavior
change regardless of format. More research is needed on a variety of topics
related to adults in career transition. The Robbins, Chartrand, and colleagues
(1994a) ﬁndings provide an excellent start, but more research is needed on
the effectiveness of interventions with differing formats for this group. More
research is also needed on the effectiveness of various interventions for
transitioning clients with speciﬁc needs and circumstances.
Identifying Effective Interventions
Given recent changes in the frequency of adult career transitions and in the
world of work, Krumboltz and Chan (2005) have advocated a shift from
the traditional conception of career counseling to ‘‘transition counseling.’’
This more comprehensive vision of career counseling includes (a) helping
clients create satisfying and successful lives; (b) considering career, personal,
family, and other life concerns as central to counseling; (c) ensuring counselors receive more comprehensive training that includes learning about
the interaction among personal, family, and career concerns; (d) dealing
with all types of transitions; and (e) fostering an ongoing counselor–client
relationship as needed by the client (Krumboltz & Chan, 2005).
Multon, Wood, Heppner, and Gysbers (2007) identiﬁed subtypes of adult
career counseling clients with their own distinct constellations of career and

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

669

psychological issues (e.g., goal instability, lack of career transition readiness,
high psychological distress, career decision-making discomfort). These ﬁndings lend support to more holistic approaches to counseling adults, especially
approaches that consider both career and personal-emotional issues and that
focus on establishing goals, developing transition coping skills, managing psychological stress, and developing career decision-making skills and
conﬁdence. Within such a comprehensive approach, potentially effective
interventions could incorporate a range of theories into the intervention
designs and implementation to help counselors synthesize information
related to, and plan action around, the general and transition-speciﬁc issues
faced by adult career clients, such as the increased need for career adaptability
and the pressure for new or upgraded skills.
Research with career transitioning adults also provides information concerning which interventions are likely to be effective. For example, case
studies with emerging adults transitioning to work suggest that social supports are vital during and after transition and that having advance awareness
of the challenges they may encounter in the work world might help young
adults anticipate and better respond to these difﬁculties (Murphy, Blustein,
Bohlig, & Platt, 2010). Based on these results, activities that encourage social
networks, training on what organizations expect from new workers, and
programs or workshops that raise awareness of common transition issues
(e.g., unmet expectations) are likely to be effective for recent high school
graduates preparing to move into the workforce.
A program called Year to Career, developed by Jobs for the Future
(http://www.jff.org), focuses on young adults seeking entry into highdemand, high-wage employment after high school and has shown some
early improvements in postsecondary employment outcomes. This program
includes short-term, intensive postsecondary experiences designed to provide young adults with career-based training (including instruction in basic
literacy skills), ongoing social supports (including counseling), connections
with employers, and work opportunities through internships. This type
of program addresses a number of issues confronting the emerging adult,
including the need to develop skills, obtain work experience, and generate
more informed and realistic expectations.
Based on a review of studies and models pertaining to adults transitioning across and within organizations, Banks and Nafukho (2008) identiﬁed
some behaviors important for successfully shifting career direction. They
conclude that the career transition issues of these adults require their active
participation in managing their own careers by being innovative and creative about career development, willing to learn informally and formally,
and communicating the desire for career growth or change within and outside the organization. They also concluded that adults should be proactive

670

Career Development and Counseling

and take advantage of organizational opportunities for career development,
such as career coaching. According to Schlossberg (1990), counselors can
also develop general and speciﬁc transition workshops to help adults cope
more effectively with their career transitions. These workshops can help
adults learn about coping, transitions, and steps to master change. The aim
is to help adults build skills that allow them to help themselves and enhance
ongoing career adaptability.
Research pertaining to adults dealing with job loss and other stressful unemployment-related transitions can also inform interventions. For
example, midlife managers experiencing job loss perceived that strategies related to acquiring new skills, pursuing entrepreneurial options, and
adopting an attitude of career ﬂexibility would help them better cope with
the challenges of reentering the workforce (Mendenhall et al., 2008). One
intervention for these adults might focus on enhancing work-related skills
(e.g., teamwork skills, technology skills) or building new job-speciﬁc skills.
Another intervention might emphasize helping these adults adopt a ‘‘free
agent’’ mentality to adjust to the notion that they must reconstruct themselves as consultants or contractors independent of the employer, which
requires these adults to accept that they may have limited value as a
long-term employee.
Case studies with career-transitioning combat veterans indicated that those
who transitioned well relied on emotion-focused coping strategies initially
but abandoned them for problem-focused approaches as the transition
process progressed (Haynie & Shepherd, 2011). Veterans in this study
also reported seeking support from other veterans and from professional
counselors. Other literature (Simpson & Armstrong, 2009) suggests that
veterans may beneﬁt from assistance with articulating their transferable
skills and pursuing options for self-employment. Based on available research,
effective interventions for transitioning veterans are likely to need to respond
to psychological needs, enable the identiﬁcation of skills developed in the
military that are relevant to the civilian work, and include social supports.
Social, family, and peer supports are powerful tools for all of the groups of
adults discussed here seeking entry or reentry into employment. This support
is exempliﬁed by the tradition of job clubs, vocational support groups, and
the increasing emphasis on building networks of people in education and the
workplace to function as support systems (Banks & Nafukho, 2008; Brown
& McPartland, 2005; Murphy et al., 2010). Support-related interventions
appear to be an important strategy for encouraging and mobilizing adults
in transition.
Given the diverse issues confronting adults transitioning from welfare to
work, it has been suggested that targeting programs to match individual
circumstances may be most effective for this group (Miller, Deitch, & Hill,

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

671

2010). Some programs aim to enhance employment retention once recipients
leave welfare (Hendra et al., 2010). For example, one approach is to provide
ﬁnancial incentives to supplement earnings, in combination with other
support services, which seems to promote employment retention among
low-wage workers. For adults moving from welfare to work, employersponsored education or training programs and counseling services are also
generally thought to be effective interventions (Alfred & Martin, 2007).
Finally, career interventions can be understood within a ‘‘phase-oftreatment model’’ that is often part of career counseling models (e.g.,
Swanson, 1995; Swanson & Fouad, 1999). Spokane’s (1991) career intervention model, for example, organizes individual and group career interventions
into beginning, activation, and completion stages. Hackney and Cormier
(2005) incorporate relationship building, problem assessment, goal setting, initiating interventions, and termination/follow-up in their counseling
model, with assessment, goal setting, and intervention as the major action
phases of the model. Krumboltz and Chan (2005) articulate the goals of career
counseling with clear implications for intervention, which include taking
action, increasing overall client life satisfaction, and dealing with a broad
array of complex issues. These models and intervention research inform
counseling practices used with career-transitioning adults.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE
What elements are essential to counseling adults in career transition? How
might targeted approaches help counselors address the issues presented by
transitioning adults, particularly those that are common across the various
types of transitions?
Four key elements should be incorporated into the counseling process:
1. Recognizing the importance of individual client background and baseline data
2. Understanding the environmental context surrounding the adult in
career transition
3. Determining the internal and external resources available to transitioning adults using appropriate assessment and interviewing
4. Selecting appropriate activities and modes of delivery to help meet
client needs
Client Background and Baseline Data
A detailed account of a client’s work, social, and educational history is critical
to understanding the range of issues they may face during the process of

672

Career Development and Counseling

making a career transition. This information can provide baseline data on
the individual’s attitudes and behaviors that may facilitate or impede transition progress and adjustment. The strain associated with changes in work
makes it especially important for counselors to ascertain potentially negative
physiological and psychological responses to transitions. For example, the
client’s response to the request ‘‘Tell me how you responded at other times
in your life when stressed’’ may reveal considerable information about how
the individual approaches task demands and the adaptation process.
Complete background data concerning adults’ educational and workrelated experiences can identify skills and experiences that can be generalized
or transferred to new situations. This type of information is especially helpful
when counseling clients who are reentering the labor force or dealing with
job loss. Although it may feel unfamiliar or overwhelming for some clients
to identify how their skills relate to possible work options, counselors
can use this information to help clients learn more about potential jobs,
recognize assets they bring to their transition experiences, and determine
where gaps may exist between available skills and job demands. Throughout
this process, clients should be positively recognized for their activities and
accomplishments while helped to consider whether they need to upgrade
their skills. Measures of abilities and skills can also help clients develop a
better understanding of their talents. An advantage of such measures is that
they can generate occupational options for clients that they might not have
considered previously (see Metz & Jones, Chapter 16, this volume).
Building a detailed history that charts the range of skills, experiences,
and supports for adult clients also presents an excellent opportunity to help
them enhance their career adaptability. Counselors can use their clients’
information to jump-start self-development efforts that can keep working
adults more marketable and enhance coping strategies. Lent (in press)
suggests activities such as updating one’s skills, expanding one’s interests,
and redesigning one’s job as ways to renew one’s career that build on
one’s current skills and characteristics. Further, through actions such as
maintaining social support and job contact networks, periodically exploring
job opportunities, and envisioning future possibilities, clients can engage
in proactive coping strategies and assert ‘‘agency’’ despite uncertain and
shifting home and work environments (Lent, in press). Counselors can
be critical to helping adults become active participants in this process by
encouraging attitudes and behaviors that promote adaptation. Hartung
(Chapter 4) and Savickas (Chapter 6) also discuss strategies to promote
greater adaptability and active engagement in the career exploration, search,
and interviewing process.

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

673

Environmental Context
As discussed earlier, career transitions occur in an environmental context,
and contexts differ for different individuals. The economic, social, cultural,
and political environment can affect adult perceptions of transition events
and their responses to them, particularly in transitions where feelings of lack
of control, anxiety, and uncertainty can magnify perceived threats. SCCT
underscores the importance of environmental inﬂuences on self-efﬁcacy
beliefs throughout the transition process. For counselors working with adults
in an era of job uncertainty, support, encouragement, and active preparation
are crucial to their clients’ adjustment and success. It is incumbent on the
counselor to be familiar with and comfortable responding to differences
in perceptions of environmental inﬂuences such as social class, cultural
values, and opportunity structures in the job market. It is not just a matter
of promoting the factors associated with adaptive transitions (e.g., agency,
optimism, clear and realistic planning) but rather embedding these factors
within the cultural and social framework of the client.
Côté’s (2000, 2002) seminal work on identity capital development highlights the importance of viewing perceptions of and reactions to the world
within an environmental framework. He proposed that navigation of life
transitions is dependent on a combination of tangible resources (e.g., parents’
social class, gender, other structural factors) and intangible resources (e.g.,
agentic personality, psychosocial and intellectual development, past experience). The acquisition of identity capital reﬂects the ability to capitalize on
agentic and structural or environmental factors to achieve positive personal
and occupational outcomes. This theory reinforces the importance of contextual factors in understanding adult development. For example, perceptions
of being a productive older worker in the labor force can depend as much
on environmental inﬂuences, such as mass marketing and peer pressure,
as they do on internal forces of psychological development. It is critical for
counselors to determine how variations in environmental context inﬂuence
the perceptions and behaviors of their clients.
Internal and External Resources
A realistic assessment of available internal and external resources is critical to
negotiating and adjusting to career transitions. There are several key internal
resources associated with adult worker adjustment, especially regarding life
transition or life stress events, including having a sense of agency, optimism,
and positive coping (Lightsey, 1996); the ability to engage in clear and realistic planning and to identify opportunities (Peterson, Lumsden, Sampson,

674

Career Development and Counseling

Reardon, & Lenz, 2002); and having a sense of continuity, purpose, and
direction (Robbins, Lee, et al., 1994). Other resources include the cognitive
skills and personality characteristics needed for success in a job or the ability
to develop new skills and behaviors associated with success. These can
aid individuals in their efforts to obtain jobs and to be successful once in
the workplace. Externally, relying on family supports and social supports
facilitates transition (Murphy et al., 2010), as does the ability to network with
others and engage in new experiences that can produce valuable contacts
(Eby et al., 2003). It is imperative for counselors to help clients identify
and access the internal and external resources that contribute to positive
transition adjustment. For example, a client responding to job loss may not
have adequately dealt with related psychological issues or responses. They
may not have the supports in place (e.g., sufﬁcient savings) to delay a new
job search and work on psychological adjustment ﬁrst. The counselor can
determine which resources are available that may help the client mount an
effective job search despite the psychological distress.
A transition model proposed by Anderson and colleagues (2011) provides
a structure for identifying and organizing available supports. It is designed
to ‘‘help clients enhance their resources for coping by assessing their (1) Situation, (2) Self, (3) Support, and (4) Strategies’’ (p. 195). Based on this model,
clients are expected to cope better with change if they perceive the transition to be a challenge rather than a threat. Encourage clients to marshal
their internal and external resources, including external supports for personal
encouragement and for professional networking, to cope with transitions that
may evoke feelings of uncertainty, loss of control, and lowered self-esteem.
Counselors can use clarifying interview techniques and relevant assessments to identify the resources available to their clients. For example,
interviews can help a counselor gauge propensity for coping, whether
expectations are realistic, and the degree to which a client is likely to use
social supports. From another perspective, realistic appraisal of the match
between client abilities and job possibilities or the need for further education
may require not only transfer of skill activities but formal assessment of
cognitive ability (e.g., ACT’s WorkKeys tests, job-speciﬁc skill and certiﬁcation exams). The counselor can also employ personality and behavior-based
assessments to determine the extent to which a client exhibits behaviors and
attitudes that are important for success in the workplace. In essence, the
counselor needs a range of assessment alternatives at his or her disposal to
address the variety of client needs likely to be encountered.
Appropriate Development Activities and Modes of Delivery
Counselors working with adults in career transition also need to understand,
and appropriately select from, the varied development activities and delivery

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

675

platforms that are available to help clients meet their transition goals.
For example, traditional education programs may serve adults who have
sufﬁcient time and whose career goals require a speciﬁc type of educational
program, and other options, such as short-term training, mentoring, and
internship opportunities, may serve adults who seek more immediate results
or desire development within the workplace (as is the case with mentoring
and internship). Identifying the mode of delivery (e.g., structured one-onone, group workshop or class, self-paced computer, or some combination of
delivery modes) that best suits the adult client is also critical. For instance,
short-term traditional counseling may be an appropriate delivery format for
those adults who approach career development and search experiences with
trepidation (e.g., those who prefer the familiar and see changes as threats
to their self-esteem, as opposed to those who seek out new experiences and
view changes as challenges to be overcome). Adults who have a positive
history of coping with stress and strain from job loss or job reentry may be
prime candidates for action-oriented career counseling (Maslach, Schaufeli, &
Leiter, 2001), which can employ a variety of different development activities
and delivery formats.
In sum, by analyzing a client’s background information, environmental
context, and the availability of internal and external resources, the counselor
can help the client clarify goals, understand the obstacles that may hinder
the realization of those goals, and identify the tools they have available
to work toward goal achievement. The counselor and client may consider
the ﬁt between client skills and the requirements of jobs or the needs of
employers or the ﬁt between the client’s education or training needs and
the different venues available to provide relevant training as they work to
identify appropriate development activities and modes of delivery.

SUMMARY AND TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
Based on the theory, research, and best practices reviewed here, successful intervention with career-transitioning adults requires combining many
different elements, including (a) the use of one or more sound theoretical
approaches to guide the collection and organization of information, (b) the
use of information on individual background and environmental contexts,
(c) the use of assessments to ﬁll in additional client information, (d) the
development and execution of targeted and concrete plans of action, (e) evaluation of the actions and outcomes for effectiveness, and (f) preparation
of clients to use new skills in future situations. Within the context of their
expanding role, counselors can facilitate the interconnection between an
evolving world of work and individuals who are increasingly expected to
‘‘own’’ or manage their own job transitions and career paths. Figure 23.1

676

Career Development and Counseling

Changing Nature of the
World of Work
•
•
•
•
•
•

Increased skill expectations
for livable wage jobs
Technology and innovation
demands
21st century skill requirements
Increased flux and change in
workplace
Adapting to global competition
Diffuse and evolving career
paths

Individual Ownership
of Career
•
•
•
•
•
•

Workers “own” their
competencies and credentials
Seek new skills and training
opportunities
Team and customer service
orientation
Capacity to manage stress
and uncertainty
Flexibility and problem
solving capabilities
Informed and ongoing
career-decision making

Counselor, Teacher, and Resource Facilitator
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Expanded role beyond traditional counseling to include outplacement, resource
planning and referral, and psycho-educational interventions
Skill in selecting and using assessment tools including career (interests and
values), cognitive, and personality-based inventories
Knowledge of the world of work, career search engines, and other online
career resources
Providing and teaching informed career decision-making
Addressing adaptation to stress and uncertainty
Providing information and referral to facilitate skill development, including
formal and informal education and training opportunities
Knowledge of interventions in individual and group modalities regarding
interpersonal effectiveness, managing work stress, and building other skills
and behaviors that are important for success

Figure 23.1
Transitions

Expanded Role of Counselors in Working With Adults Making Career

illustrates this interconnection and summarizes what counselors can do to
help adult clients undergoing career transitions.
This ﬁgure illustrates a range of knowledge, skills, and resources that
counselors can employ to enable individuals to be competitive and productive members of the workforce. Because clients may grapple with a
number of different issues, counselors need to be knowledgeable about
career information and work-related resources; sufﬁciently ﬂexible to move
between assessment, counseling, coaching, and teaching roles; and able to
help the client assemble a broader referral and support network or system.
For example, counselors need to understand the changing technology and
innovation demands of the world of work and be proﬁcient in selecting and
using a wide variety of assessments to ascertain client skills, place them in

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

677

context, and facilitate opportunities for skill training to help clients meet
their needs.
There are ﬁve areas of focus that are especially important for counselors
who are working with adults experiencing career transitions:
• Action

orientation. Counselors should reinforce the connections
between concrete activities and behaviors and clients’ transition issues
and goals throughout the process. By making these connections more
transparent to clients, counselors are able to help them document their
progress and motivate them to continue pursuing a successful career
transition plan.
• Wide-ranging interventions and supports. To respond to the diverse support needs of adults in transition, counselors must remain up-to-date
on the range of services available to assist with speciﬁc types of career
transition issues. By understanding the types (e.g., support groups
for veterans entering the civilian labor force) and locations (e.g., local
community colleges, state agencies) of services, counselors can better
determine which interventions may be appropriate and useful for their
adult clients.
• Work context. To help career-transitioning adults respond more effectively to the work context in which they ﬁnd themselves, counselors need
to understand the characteristics of the current economy and the world
of work at all levels (e.g., local, state, and national). Employment rates,
industries that are growing, organizations hiring locally, the changing
skill requirements for occupations, and the skills desired by employers
all are important characteristics of the work context. This information
can help counselors to (a) better understand the environmental contexts
in which clients experience their career transitions and (b) work with
clients to generate realistic solutions that are likely to enhance transition
success.
• Cue up for adaptability. Counselors need to promote career adaptability
in their clients and provide them with tools, skills, and knowledge for
dealing with career change. In addition to assisting clients with ﬁnding
solutions that address more immediate issues, counselors should think
about ways in which they might help clients proactively approach future
career change.
• The whole person. To respond to the range of issues encountered by
career-transitioning adults, counselors have to attend to the whole
person. The multifaceted issues that often surface during counseling
often demand varied interventions that go beyond career tasks and
involve other parts of life (e.g., psychological symptoms, relationship
demands).

678

Career Development and Counseling

In summary, more adults are experiencing a wider range of career transitions in the United States than ever before. We have highlighted the
context in which these transitions occur, including continuing economic
upheavals, occupational shifts, and changes in the workplace itself. We
have reviewed the most prevalent types of career transitions, including high
school graduates who are unprepared for work, employed adults wanting
to shift their career direction, and unemployed adults seeking entry into
employment, including those responding to job loss. These adults are challenged by myriad issues, such as the need to identify current skills and
develop new skills, the need for career adaptability, and the need to cope
with job and ﬁnancial uncertainty. We considered several career and adult
development theories that can inform career counseling with transitioning
adults. Unfortunately, there is limited research available on the effectiveness
of various career interventions for adults going through career transitions.
However, the available literature does offer a number of suggestions for
helping adults cope with current challenges, as well as preparing them to
proactively manage their future career and life development. Helping adults
learn to realistically appraise their life circumstances, respond adaptively
and ﬂexibly to these life demands, and effectively engage available supports
is critical to successful counseling with career-transitioning adults.
REFERENCES
Aiken, L. R. (1998). Human development in adulthood. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Alfred, M. V., & Martin, L. G. (2007). The development of economic self-sufﬁciency
among former welfare recipients: Lessons learned from Wisconsin’s welfare to
work program. International Journal of Training and Development, 11(1), 2–20.
Anderson, M. L., Goodman, J., & Schlossberg, N. K. (2011). Counseling adults in
transition: Linking Schlossberg’s theory with practice in a diverse world. New York, NY:
Springer.
Arthur, M. B., & Rousseau, D. M. (1996). A career lexicon for the 21st century.
Academy of Management Executives, 10(4), 28–39.
Atchley, R. (1989). A continuity theory of normal aging. The Gerontologist, 29,
183–190.
Baltes, P. (1997). On the incomplete architecture of human ontogeny. American
Psychologist, 52, 366–380.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Banks, C. H., & Nafukho, F. M. (2008, February). Career transitions across and
within organizations: Implications for human resource development. Paper presented at the Academy of Human Resource Development International Research
Conference in the Americas, Panama City, FL. Retrieved from http://www.eric
.ed.gov/PDFS/ED501678.pdf
Brand, J. E. (2004). Enduring effects of job displacement on career outcomes (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

679

Brand, J. E., & Burgard, S. A. (2008). Job displacement and social participation over
the lifecourse: Findings for a cohort of joiners. Social Forces, 87(1), 211–242.
Bridges, W. (2004). Transitions: Making sense of life’s changes. Cambridge, MA: Da
Capo Press.
Bright, J. E. H., & Pryor, G. L. (2008). Shiftwork: A chaos theory of careers agenda for
change in career counseling. Australian Journal of Career Development, 17, 63–72.
Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1996). A social cognitive framework for career choice
counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 354–366.
Brown, S. D., & McPartland, E. B. (2005). Career interventions: Current status
and future directions. In W. Walsh & M. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational
psychology (pp. 195–226). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carnevale, A. P., Smith, N., & Strohl, J. (2010). Help wanted: Projections of jobs and
education requirements through 2018. Retrieved from University of Georgetown,
Center on Education and the Workforce: http://www9.georgetown.edu/grad
/gppi/hpi/cew/pdfs/FullReport.pdf
Clemens, E. V., & Milsom, A. S. (2008). Enlisting service members’ transition into
the civilian world of work: A cognitive information processing approach. Career
Development Quarterly, 56, 246–256.
Côté, J. E. (2000). Arrested adulthood: The changing nature of maturity and identity. New
York, NY: New York University Press.
Côté, J. E. (2002). The role of identity capital in the transition to adulthood: The
individualization thesis examined. Journal of Youth Studies, 5(2), 117–134.
Danziger, S., & Ratner, D. (2010). Labor market outcomes and the transition to
adulthood. The Future of Children, 20(1), 133–158.
DeFrank, R., & Ivancevich, J. M. (1986). Job loss: An individual level review and
model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 19, 1–20.
Ebberwein, C. A., Krieshok, T. S., Ulven, J. C., & Prosser, E. C. (2004). Voices
in transition: Lessons on career adaptability. Career Development Quarterly, 52,
292–308.
Eby, L. T., & Buch, K. (1994). The effect of job search method, sex, activity level,
and emotional acceptance on new job characteristics: Implications for counseling
unemployed professionals. Journal of Employment Counseling, 31, 69–82.
Eby, L. T., Butts, M., & Lockwood, A. (2003). Predictors of success in the era of the
boundaryless career. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 24, 689–708.
Farber, H. S. (2005). What do we know about job loss in the United States? Evidence
from the displaced workers survey, 1984–2004. Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 13–28.
Glassdoor. (2011). Employee conﬁdence survey: Overview, methodology & highlights.
Retrieved from http://www.glassdoor.com/press/wp-content/ﬁles_mf/13014
04295Glassdoor_Q1_2011SummaryFINAL.pdf
Hackney, H., & Cormier, S. (2005). The professional counselor: A process guide to helping
(5th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Haynie, J. M., & Shepherd, D. (2011). Toward a theory of discontinuous career
transition: Investigating career transitions necessitated by traumatic life events.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 96(3), 501–524.
Hendra, R., Dillman, K. N., Hamilton, G., Lundquist, E., Martinson, K., Wavelet,
M., & Williams, S. (2010). How effective are different approaches aiming to increase

680

Career Development and Counseling

employment retention and advancement? Final impact for twelve models. Retrieved from
MDRC: http://www.mdrc.org/publications/558/full.pdf
Hesketh, B. (2000). Prevention and development in the workplace. In S. D. Brown &
R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling psychology (pp. 471–498). New York, NY:
Wiley.
Holzer, H. (2000). Employers and welfare recipients in Milwaukee and other metropolitan
states: Summary of ﬁndings from employer survey. San Francisco, CA: UCLA School
of Public Policy and Research.
Hudson, F. M. (1999). The adult years: Mastering the art of self renewal (rev. ed.). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Infoplease. (n.d.). Median annual income, by level of education, 1990–2008. Retrieved
from http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0883617.html
Kelvin, P., & Jarrett, J. A. (1985). Unemployment: Its social and psychological effects.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kerka, S. (1995). Adult career counseling in a new age (ERIC Digest No. 167). Retrieved
from http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=ED389881
Krumboltz, J. D., & Chan, A. (2005). Career interventions: Current status and future
directions. In W. Walsh & M. Savickas (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology
(pp. 347–370). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lent, R. W. (in press). Career-life preparedness: Revisiting career planning and
adjustment in the new workplace. Career Development Quarterly.
Lightsey, O. R., Jr. (1996). What leads to wellness? The role of psychological resources
in well-being. Counseling Psychologist, 24, 589–759.
Maslach, C., Schaufeli, W., & Leiter, M. (2001). Job burnout. Annual Review of
Psychology, 52, 397–422.
Mendenhall, R., Kalil, A., Spindel, L. J., & Hart, C. M. D. (2008). Job loss at midlife: Managers and executives face the ‘‘new risk economy.’’ Social Forces, 87(1),
185–209.
Miller, C., Deitch, V., & Hill, A. (2010). Paths to advancement for single parents. [Executive summary]. Retrieved from MDRC: http://www.mdrc.org/publications/582
/execsum.pdf
Moss, W., & Baugh, J. (1983). Displaced homemakers: An overlooked extension audience. Journal of Extension 21(4). Retrieved from http://www.joe.org/joe/1983july
/a3.html
Multon, K. D., Wood, R., Heppner, M. J., & Gysbers, N. C. (2007). A clusteranalytic investigation of subtypes of adult career counseling clients: Toward a
taxonomy of career problems. Journal of Career Assessment, 15, 66–86. doi:10.1177
/1069072706294508
Murphy, K. A., Blustein, D. L., Bohlig, A. J., & Platt, M. G. (2010). The college-tocareer transition: An exploration of emerging adulthood. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 88, 174–181.
National Career Development Association. (2011). National survey of working
America 2011. Retrieved from http://associationdatabase.com/aws/NCDA/asset
_manager/get_ﬁle/37267

Counseling Adults for Career Transitions

681

Nicholson, N. (1990). The transition cycle: Causes, outcomes, processes, and forms.
In S. Fisher & C. Cooper (Eds.), On the move: The psychology of change and transition
(pp. 83–108). West Sussex, England: Wiley.
O’Connell, D. J. (2008). Unpacking personal adaptability at work. Retrieved from
http://www.courts.michigan.gov/mji/curricula_guide/Unpacking_Personal
_Adaptability_at_work.pdf
Padula, M. (1994). Reentry women: A literature review with recommendations for
counseling and research. Journal of Counseling & Development, 73, 10–16.
Peterson, G. W., Lumsden, J. A., Sampson, J. P., Reardon, R. C., & Lenz, J. G. (2002).
Using a cognitive information processing approach in career counseling with
adults. In S. G. Niles (Ed.), Adult career development: Concepts, issues and practices
(pp. 98–117). Tulsa, OK: National Career Development Association.
Robbins, S. (1989). The role of contemporary psychoanalysis in counseling psychology. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36, 267–278.
Robbins, S., Chartrand, J., McFadden, K., & Lee, R. (1994). Efﬁcacy of leader-led
and self-directed career workshops for middle-aged and older adults. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 41, 83–90.
Robbins, S., Lee, R., & Wan, T. (1994). Goal continuity as a mediator of early
retirement adjustment: Testing a multidimensional model. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 41, 18–26.
Ruh, D., Spicer, P., & Vaughan, K. (2009). Helping veterans with disabilities transition to employment. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, 22(1),
67–74.
Schlossberg, N. K. (1990). Training counselors to work with older adults. Generations,
14(1), 7–10.
Schlossberg, N. K., Waters, E. B., & Goodman, J. (1995). Counseling adults in transition:
Linking practice with theory (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.
Simpson, A., & Armstrong, S. (2009). From the military to the civilian work force:
Addressing veteran career development concerns. Career Planning and Adult
Development Journal, 25(1), 177–187.
Spokane, A. (1991). Career intervention. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Super, D. E., & Knasel, E. G. (1981). Career development in adulthood: Some theoretical problems and a possible solution. British Journal of Guidance & Counselling,
9, 194–201.
Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., & Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, life-space approach
to careers. In D. Brown & L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.)
(pp. 121–178). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Swanson, J. (1995). The process and outcome of career counseling. In W. B. Walsh &
S. H. Osipow (Eds.), Handbook of vocational psychology (pp. 217–259). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Swanson, J., & Fouad, N. (1999). Career theory and practice: Learning through case
studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). 2008–2018 Employment
projections. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/emp/#tables

682

Career Development and Counseling

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment & Training Administration. (2008). Current strategies to employ and retain older workers (ETA Occasional Paper 2008–1).
Washington, DC: Author.
Vetter, L., Hull, W., Putzstuck, C., & Dean, G. (1986). Adult career counseling: Resources
for program planning and development. Bloomington, IL: Meridian Education.
Vondracek, F., & Porfeli, E. (2002). Life-span developmental perspectives on adult
career development: Recent advances. In S. Niles (Ed.), Adult career development:
Concepts, issues and practices (pp. 20–38). Tulsa, OK: National Career Development
Association.
Whiston, S., & Brecheisen, B. (2002). Evaluating the effectiveness of adult career
development programs. In S. Niles (Ed.), Adult career development: Concepts, issues
and practices (pp. 370–388). Tulsa, OK: National Career Development Association.
Whiston, S., Brecheisen, B., & Stephens, J. (2003). Does treatment modality affect
career counseling effectiveness? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 390–410.
Williams, D. (1999, January). Life events and career change: Transition psychology
in practice. Paper presented at the British Psychology Society’s Occupational
Psychology Conference, Blackpool, UK.

Author Index
Abdul-Adil, J., 261
Abele, A. E., 312
Aber, J. L., 550
Abrami, P. C., 552
Abrams, M., 494, 583
Abu-Freha, A., 547
Ackerman, P. L., 65, 308, 390,
392, 477
Acton, G. S., 450
Adams, A., 548
Adams, G. A., 96
Adams, J. T., 215
Aiken, L. R., 660
Ajzen, I., 487, 609
Akers, E., 276
Akos, P., 310
Albert, K. A., 545
Alderfer, C. P., 420
Alexander, K. L., 331
Alexander, M. G., 284
Alfred, M. V., 659, 671
Algozinne, B., 370
Ali, S., 245, 246, 252, 253, 257,
267
Ali, S. R., 245, 246, 254, 257,
260, 265
Allaire, S. H., 374
Allen, J., 555
Allen, L., 455, 550
Allen, T. D., 344
Allport, G. W., 419, 421
Alpert, A., 517–518
Altmaier, E. M., 369
Alvarez-Salvat, R., 333
Alvi, S. A., 61
Amernic, J., 65
Amir, T., 494, 509, 581
Amstad, F. T., 342
Anderson, C. A., 153
Anderson, D., 451
Anderson, M. L., 655, 657, 661,
674
Anderson, M. Z., 278, 283, 284
Andrews, K. D., 530
Anselmi, D. L., 189
Aoyagi, M., 567
Aranya, N., 65
Arends, L. R., 610
Armstrong, P. I., 67, 219, 220,
392, 409–410, 423, 437
Armstrong, S., 658, 661, 670

Arnett, J., 94
Arni, T. J., 556
Aronson, J., 259
Arredondo, P., 188, 288
Arseneau, J. R., 282
Arthur, M. B., 150, 655
Arthur, W., 431
Asama, N. F., 308
Asaym, P. A., 193, 194
Ashford, S. J., 547
Ashforth, B. E., 42, 44
Assouline, M., 64, 68
Astin, A. W., 65
Atchley, R., 666
Atieh, J. M., 417
Atkinson, D. R., 226, 578
Auerbach, S., 334
Austin, J. T., 220
Auyer, J., 517–518
Axelrad, S., 86, 422, 540
Azrin, N., 376
Azrin, N. H., 613
Bae, S., 336
Bailey, T.-K. M., 265
Baker, D. B., 86
Balcazar, F., 362
Balfanz, R., 332
Ballout, H. I., 431
Balogun, J. A., 542
Baltes, P., 666
Bandalos, D. I., 228, 495
Bandura, A., 117–119, 125,
127–128, 132, 140, 260,
265, 480, 482, 483, 484,
485, 495, 665
Banks, C. H., 669, 670
Barak, A., 460
Barbaranelli, C., 260
Barbuti, S., 464
Bardi, A., 422
Bardick, A. D., 584
Barger, N. J., 491
Barling, J., 627
Barlow, J., 369
Barnett, R. C., 201
Barnett, S. M., 194, 410
Baron, R. C., 376
Barrick, M. R., 301, 308, 314,
315, 391, 491, 640
Bartel, V. B., 334

Barton, P., 461
Bataille, C. D., 96
Battle, A., 335
Bauer, T. N., 611
Baugh, J., 658
Beale, A. V., 541
Beattie, O. V., 170
Beck, S. E., 341
Beck, U., 150
Beehr, T. A., 431
Beimers, D., 263
Bell, L. A., 188
Bell, S. T., 431
Belz, J. R., 280
Bempechat, J., 261, 336
Benbow, C. P., 195
Bender, K. A., 201
Benishek, L. A., 344
Benitez, D. T., 371
Benz, M. R., 372, 374
Berdahl, J. L., 200
Berkman, L. F., 201
Bernard, B., 266
Bernes, K. B., 584, 586
Berry, C. M., 314, 640
Besalel, V. A., 613
Betsworth, D., 459
Betsworth, D. G., 389, 551
Betz, N., 451
Betz, N. E., 29, 57, 65, 67, 99,
102, 103, 116, 130, 132,
192, 223, 285, 312, 369,
397, 434, 439, 483, 484,
485, 514, 543
Beutell, N. J., 201
Beveridge, S., 360, 370, 371
Biering-Sørensen, F., 359
Bieschke, K. J., 227, 233, 275,
278, 289, 344, 485
Billups, A., 529
Binet, A., 450
Bingham, R., 235
Bingham, R. P., 498
Bjelland, M. J., 362
Black, J. S., 547
Black, M., 460
Black, M. D., 172
Blau, G., 596
Blazini, A. P., 434
Bledsoe, M., 223, 331, 336, 337
Blinne, W. R., 69

683

684

Author Index

Bloch, D. T., 546
Bluck, S., 163
Blumberg, F., 228
Blustein, D. L., 8, 88–89, 99,
106, 160, 191, 224, 231,
232–233, 245, 246, 247,
250, 253, 255–256, 261,
262, 266, 329, 330, 331,
332, 336, 341, 346, 347,
375, 470, 487, 543, 546,
550, 555, 584, 588–589,
621, 669
Boaler, J., 192
Boatwright, K. J., 281
Bobek, B. L., 511, 529, 576, 653
Boekaerts, M., 552
Bohlig, A. J., 669
Bolino, M. C., 98, 99, 643
Bolles, R. N., 70, 598, 599
Bonnett, H. R., 585
Bono, J. E., 623
Bordin, E. S., 3, 88, 168
Borgen, F. H., 57, 65, 85, 102,
130, 308, 309, 391, 397,
399, 411, 482, 483, 484,
490, 492, 514
Borman, W. C., 314, 418, 635,
636, 641, 645
Born, M. P., 604, 606
Boswell, W. R., 607
Boudreau, J. W., 607
Bowlby, J., 332
Bowling, N. A., 626
Bowman, S. L., 545
Bradley, P., 490
Bradway, K., 455
Brand, B., 340
Brand, J. E., 660, 661
Brannick, M. T., 625
Brayﬁeld, A. H., 507, 508, 626
Brecheisen, B., 667, 668
Brecheisen, B. K., 18, 321, 542,
575
Breeding, R. R., 374
Brenner, B. R., 42, 203, 278, 279
Brenner, O. C., 434
Bretz, R. D., 417, 431
Brewer, J. M., 507
Bridgeman, B., 466
Bridges, W., 655–656
Brief, A. P., 417, 623, 627
Briggs, K. C., 491
Bright, J. E. H., 655–656
Brody, E., 453
Brody, N., 453
Brogan, D., 338
Bronfenbrenner, U., 251, 252
Brooke, V. A., 363
Brooks, G. R., 189
Brooks, L., 485
Browder, D., 370
Brown, C., 344
Brown, D., 92, 106, 420, 421
Brown, J. L., 571
Brown, M. L., 286

Brown, M. T., 245, 246, 251,
253, 255, 264, 267
Brown, R., 190
Brown, S., 106, 167, 588
Brown, S. D., 1, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 60, 67, 70, 115, 116,
120, 122, 127, 128, 129,
130, 131, 132, 134, 137,
138, 139, 141, 142, 194,
206, 224, 251, 252, 253,
255, 282, 283, 299, 307,
311, 317, 318, 321, 329,
458, 459, 460, 483, 484,
486, 487, 494, 495, 496,
511, 526, 565, 566, 567,
569, 570, 571, 572, 573,
574, 575, 577, 579, 582,
583, 584, 613, 614, 621,
629, 633, 643, 667, 670
Bruch, M.-A., 307, 311
Bubany, S. T., 393, 410
Buch, K., 661
Buchanan, N. T., 200
Buck, R. W., Jr., 223
Budge, S. L., 287
Budig, M. J., 198
Budwig, M., 199
Buehler, C., 422
Buelow, K., 480
Bullock, E. E., 308
Bullock, H. E., 258
Burck, H. D., 555
Burgard, S. A., 660, 661
Burgess, B. L., 332
Burkhauser, R. V., 362
Burlew, L. D., 43
Burnham, J. J., 528
Burt, M., 344
Burton, N., 466
Butler, D., 191
Butts, M., 661
Byars, A. M., 116, 133, 283, 369,
495, 577
Byars-Winston, A., 225, 230
Byars-Winston, A. M., 225, 233,
236, 585
Bybee, D., 369
Bynner, J., 550
Cable, D. M., 431
Cairo, P. C., 103
Callaman, J. M., 338
Callan, V. J., 496
Calvert, P. D., 103, 488
Cameto, R., 357, 358
Cammarota, J., 336, 339
Camp, C. C., 60
Campbell, B. W., 116, 282, 283
Campbell, D. E., 338
Campbell, D. P., 69, 396, 399,
401, 402, 403, 404, 410,
459, 465, 484
Campbell, J. P., 395, 420, 524,
635
Campbell, S. M., 432

Campbell, T. A., 338
Campion, M. A., 509
Canivez, G., 457
Cannata, M., 597, 598, 599
Caplan, R. D., 613
Caprara, G. V., 260
Caputo, R. K., 245
Care, E., 190
Carlson, D. S., 201
Carlson, J., 460
Carlson, R. E., 634
Carnevale, A. P., 654
Carr, A., 494, 583
Carr, J. Z., 627, 641
Carroll, J., 453, 510
Carson, A. D., 64, 68
Carswell, S. B., 338
Carter, H. D., 171
Carter, R. T., 577
Case, R., 549
Casillas, A., 555
Caspi, A., 299, 300, 305, 431
Cass, V. C., 278
Castellino, D., 337
Catalano, M., 64
Catalano, S., 343
Cattell, H., 490
Cattell, K., 490
Cattell, R., 453
Cattell, R. B., 490
Ceci, S., 456, 458
Ceci, S. J., 194, 410
Cerezo, A., 275
Certo, N. J., 361, 363
Chae, Y., 169
Chan, A., 668, 671
Chang, B., 610
Chang, C. H., 642
Chapeland, V., 332
Chartrand, J., 668
Chartrand, J. M., 29, 60, 516
Chaves, A., 260, 265, 331
Chen, E. C., 228
Chen, G., 420
Chen-Hayes, S. F., 284
Cheung, M. S. M., 595
Chi, N. W., 602
Chiaburu, D. S., 314, 640
Chiocchio, F., 42, 43
Chisholm, L., 550
Chou, E. L., 228
Chronister, K. M., 207, 232, 343,
344, 614
Chu, S. P., 30
Chung, Y. B., 88, 231, 275, 276,
277, 281, 283, 285
Ciftci, A., 370
Claire, T., 259
Clancy, S. M., 309
Clark, A., 200, 201
Clark, F. E., 507
Clark, G., 364
Clark, L. A., 302, 582, 633
Clarke, C. P., 68–69
Clausen, J. A., 301

Author Index

Clemens, E. V., 658, 659
Cline, F., 466
Cochran, L., 551
Cohen, D., 461
Cohen, J., 433, 566, 567
Cohen, R., 372
Cole, N. S., 61, 62
Coleman, J. S., 330
Coley, R., 461
Collins, K. M., 201
Collins, N. M., 577
Collins, P. F., 390
Collinsworth, L. L., 200
Colon, Y., 338
Conkel, J. L., 553, 579
Conoley, C. W., 68
Constantine, M. G., 232, 546
Conte, J. M., 40
Conyers, L., 370, 374
Cook, E. P., 99
Coon, H. M., 434
Cooper, H., 303
Corcoran, M., 253, 254
Cormier, S., 671
Cornwell, J. M., 278
Corral, M., 338
Correll, S. J., 191, 192, 193
Corrigall, E., 433
Costa, P. T., Jr., 301, 302, 303,
304, 307, 308, 316, 322,
433, 490
Costanza, D., 452
Côté, J. E., 673
Côté, S., 608
Courtney, M. E., 262, 263, 265,
267
Crace, R. K., 421, 568
Craddock, S., 360
Craig, K., 153
Craik, K. H., 29
Crawford, K. M., 548
Creagh, M. G., 332
Creed, P., 134
Creed, P. A., 97, 102, 307,
310, 480, 550, 581, 606,
609
Crites, J. O., 21, 96, 479, 480,
493, 509
Crivellato, E., 449
Croity-Belz, S., 332
Croizet, J. C., 259
Crossley, C. D., 606, 608, 612,
613
Croteau, J. M., 275, 278, 281,
283, 284
Crothers, M., 134
Crouter, A. C., 333
Crusa-Guet, M. C., 204
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 5, 170
Cullen, L., 369
Curan, J., 614
Curran, L. T., 469
D’Achiardi, C., 477, 484
Dahir, C. A., 528

Dahlbeck, D. T., 45
Daiger, D., 482, 493
Daiger, D. C., 63
Dalal, R., 638
Daniels, K. K., 495
Danielsen, A. G., 335
Danziger, S., 656, 657
Darcy, M., 308
Darcy, M. U. A., 67
Darity, W., 337
Datti, P. A., 282
Dauwalder, J. P., 585
Davidson, L. M., 337
Davis, D., 225, 230
Davis, J. H., 177
Davis, J. M., 283
Davis, L., 359
Dawis, R., 452
Dawis, R. V., 29, 30, 32–34, 36,
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 46,
47, 60, 85, 88, 167, 220,
221, 247, 248, 279, 368,
388, 417, 418, 421, 422,
423, 424, 425, 426, 429,
431, 434, 435, 436, 487,
516, 621, 623, 625, 634,
642
Day, S. X., 248, 423, 482
Dean, G., 658
Deans, J., 190
DeBell, C., 572
de Fillipis, A., 332
DeFrank, R., 660
De Fruyt, F., 308, 431
Degges-White, S., 46
de Groot, E. V., 552
Deitch, V., 670
De Jong, M., 610
DeLaGarza, D., 359
Delaney-Klinger, K., 641
Della-Posta, C., 613
Deluty, R. H., 281
Del Vecchio, W. F., 300
Demaray, M. K., 337
de Meijer, L. A. L., 604
DeNavas-Walt, C., 245
De Neve, K. M., 303
De Pater, I. E., 499
Depue, R. A., 390
DeRosier, M. E., 336
de Roten, Y., 574
Derous, E., 604
DeRue, D. S., 431
DeShon, R. P., 627
Devenis, L., 88–89
De Witte, H., 609
DeWitz, S., 225
Diamond, L. M., 282
Dickel, K., 367
Diemer, M. A., 245, 246, 252,
253, 261, 267, 333, 334,
411, 546
Dietrich, J., 334
Di Fabio, A., 341
Digman, J. M., 489

685

Dik, B. J., 395, 400
DiLeo, D., 373
Dillard, J. M., 258
Dimito, A., 281
Dispenza, F., 275, 283
Distefano, T. M., 278
Doherty, A., 363
Doherty, E. M., 417
Dohm, T. E., 516
Dollinger, S. J., 309
Dominguez, C. S., 542
Domzal, C., 362
Donahue, S. M., 201
Dong, S., 366
Donnay, D. A., 492
Donnay, D. A. C., 57, 65, 73,
106, 396, 399, 401, 490,
492, 514
Donohue, R., 68
Donohue, S., 200
Donovan, M. A., 637
Dotterer, A. M., 333
Doverspike, D., 431
Dovidio, J. F., 190
Downey, K. H., 526
Drasgow, F., 200
Dreary, I., 456
Drummond, P. D., 613
DuBois, D. C., 369
Due, A. M., 516
Duncan, G. J., 259
Dunkle, J. H., 280
Dunn, E. C., 367
Dunston, K., 246
Durodoye, B., 542
Duxbury, L., 430
Dworsky, A., 262, 263, 265,
267
Dyjur, P., 541
Earle, A., 198
Eatough, E. M., 642
Ebberwein, C., 375
Ebberwein, C. A., 654
Eby, L. T., 299, 344, 661,
674
Eccles, J. S., 194
Edelman, M. W., 259
Edelstein, R. S., 169
Edwards, J. R., 431, 487
Edwards, K. J., 65
Eggerth, D. E., 44, 490
Eidelman, S., 284
Einarsen, S., 345, 346
Eisenberger, R., 346, 628
Ekeberg, E., 628
Elder, G. H., 301
Elfering, A., 342
Elizur, D., 422
Ellemers, N., 342, 343
Elliott, J. E., 275
Elliott, R., 451
Ellis, A., 457
Else-Quest, N. M., 193
Emmanuelle, V., 332

686

Author Index

England, G. W., 40, 516, 625,
634
England, P., 198, 199
Enochs, L., 484
Enright, M. S., 133, 370
Entwisle, D. R., 331
Erdogan, B., 611
Erez, A., 638
Erickson, W., 359
Erikson, E., 163, 545
Ertel, K. A., 201
Eschleman, K. J., 626
Esparza, P., 338
Ester, P., 419
Estrada, Y., 225, 230
Ethridge, G., 370
Etringer, B. D., 275
Evans, J. H., 555
Evans, K. M., 232
Even, C. E., 47
Eysenck, H., 457
Fabian, E., 366, 374
Fabian, E. S., 116, 133, 357, 359,
363, 365, 370, 372
Fall, K., 257
Fallon, T., 97, 480
Farber, H. S., 660
Farrar, E., 461
Fasel, U., 342
Fassinger, R., 203
Fassinger, R. E., 42, 193, 194,
275, 278, 279, 281, 282,
284
Feather, N. T., 609
Feldman, D. C., 299, 311
Feller, R., 467
Fennema, E., 456
Fenzel, M., 369
Ferguson, A. D., 282
Ferguson, R. F., 336
Fernandes, A., 576, 577
Fernet, C., 370
Ferrari, J. R., 613
Ferreira-Marques, J., 426
Figueiredo, C. M., 335
Finkel, E. J., 160
Finkelberg-White, S., 550
Finkelhor, D., 339
Finn, S. E., 405
Fischer, R., 418, 422
Fischer, R. L., 263
Fisher, C. D., 547
Fishman-Nadav, Y., 459
Fitzgerald, L., 451
Fitzgerald, L. F., 99, 102, 103,
200
Fitzpatrick, M. E., 246, 252
Fitzsimmons, G. W., 422
Fitzsimons, G. M., 160
Flamer, C., 603
Fleischman, S., 340
Fleishman, E., 452
Fleishman, P. R., 418
Fleitas, J., 372

Flook, L., 337
Flores, L. Y., 196, 215, 219, 220,
225, 228, 232
Flores, R., 613
Flores, T., 376
Fluckinger, C. D., 610
Flum, H., 160, 543
Folbre, N., 199
Foley, K., 614
Folsom, B., 575, 586
Fontaine, J. R. J., 418
Ford, J. K., 627
Fordham, S., 337
Forrest, L., 207, 281
Forster, E. M., 164
Fouad, N., 67, 233, 484, 671
Fouad, N. A., 35, 47, 66, 205,
215, 216, 219, 220, 225,
226, 227, 231, 233, 235,
236, 245, 246, 252, 253,
255, 267, 335, 411, 434,
484, 485, 486, 498, 551,
569, 577, 585, 589
Franze, I. J., 613
Freedman, M., 96
Freeman, J. G., 526
Fretz, B. R., 576
Friedman, S. M., 191
Frigon, J. Y., 42, 43
Fritzsche, B., 459
Fritzsche, B. A., 40, 41, 57, 623
Fukuyama, M. A., 282
Fuller, B. E., 308
Fuller, M. B., 555
Furlong, A., 550
Furnham, A., 545
Gaertner, S. L., 190
Gainor, K. A., 133, 225, 229
Galanter, E., 162
Galassi, J. P., 568
Gallagher, L. A., 331, 333
Galton, F., 450
Gao, N., 367
Garcia, M., 332
Gardner, H., 453, 455
Gardner, R. G., 314, 640
Gareis, K. C., 201
Garrosa Hernández, E., 346
Garza, N., 358
Gasser, C. E., 309, 399
Gasser, M. B., 635
Gati, I., 459, 493, 494, 509, 581,
582, 583, 588
Gauthier, L., 370
Gay, E. G., 425, 434
Gee, D., 228
Geisinger, K., 460
Gerstein, L. H., 545
Gervey, R., 367
Gibson, C., 217
Gibson, D. E., 231
Gibson, D. L., 41
Gibson, W. M., 625
Giddens, A., 165

Gilbert, M. S., 281
Gilbride, D. D., 376
Gilens, M., 301
Gillies, R. M., 510
Gingrich, J., 614
Ginsburg, S., 86
Ginsburg, S. W., 422, 540
Ginzberg, E., 86, 422, 540
Glasscock, J. M., 330
Glavin, K. W., 106
Glomb, T. M., 597
Goldberg, L. R., 299, 301, 490
Goldman, S., 452
Gomez, M. J., 227, 231, 233
Gonsiorek, J. C., 281
Good, G. E., 189
Gooden, M. P., 604
Goodman, G. S., 169
Goodman, J., 655, 656
Goodman, J. A., 284
Goodnough, G. E., 102
Goossens, L., 309
Goranson, D., 408
Gore, P. A., 60, 116, 130, 282,
283, 484, 486, 511, 512,
522, 524, 576
Gottfredson, G. D., 59, 308, 397,
408, 514
Gottfredson, L., 454
Gottfredson, L. S., 10, 106, 133,
134, 190, 192, 204, 222,
249, 250, 281, 371, 372,
388, 540, 548, 549, 551,
641
Gottman, J. M., 547
Gough, H. G., 490
Gow, A., 455
Graham, J. W., 636
Grandey, A. A., 345
Granovetter, M. S., 599
Green, M. A., 309, 391, 492
Greenhaus, J. H., 102, 103, 201,
434
Greenwald, A. G., 190
Gregg, R., 367
Grifﬁn, B., 43, 44, 47
Grifﬁn, P., 283
Grifﬁth, D., 261
Grigorenko, E., 455
Grossman, J. B., 338
Grossman, J. M., 331
Grzywacz, J. G., 201, 342
Gualdron, D. S., 232–233
Guan, M., 440
Guay, F., 370
Guay, R. P., 430–431
Gueron, I. M., 263, 267
Guichard, J., 106
Gully, S. M., 486
Gunnesch-Luca, G., 608
Gunsalus, A. C., 225, 230
Gunsalus, R., 225, 230
Gupta, A., 235
Gupta, R., 308, 391
Gupta, S., 67, 220, 226

Author Index

Gushue, G. V., 68–69, 230
Gysbers, N., 556
Gysbers, N. C., 191, 197, 542,
668
Haase, C. M., 601
Haase, R.-F., 307, 311, 555
Habermas, T., 163
Hacker, J., 494, 583
Hackett, G., 15, 102, 103, 115,
116, 120, 122, 123, 127,
130, 131, 132, 133, 134,
135, 194, 224, 228, 251,
252, 282, 283, 329, 369,
458, 483, 487, 495
Hackney, H., 671
Hagner, D., 373, 376
Hahn, H., 359
Halbesleben, J. R. B., 98, 99
Haley-Lock, A., 258, 263
Hall, D., 470
Hall, D. T., 150, 151, 307
Halle, D., 250
Halpern, A. S., 374
Halpern, D. F., 456
Hamilton, G., 263, 267
Hammer, A. L., 483, 490, 491
Hanlon, T. E., 338
Hannah, J. S., 259
Hansen, J. C., 285, 308, 390, 391,
393, 394, 395, 399, 400,
402, 403, 404, 408, 410,
411, 412, 483
Hansen, J.-I. C., 387
Hansen, P. M., 477
Hansen, R. N., 73
Hanson, M. A., 653
Hanson, W. M., 405
Hardin, E. E., 220, 228–229,
235, 434
Hardney, K., 542
Hardy, S., 601
Hargrove, B. K., 332, 568
Harkins, M. A., 547
Harmon, L. W., 57, 65, 231, 277,
397, 411, 483, 514, 548
Harms, P. D., 395
Harper, M. C., 45
Harrington, J., 459
Harrington, T., 459
Harris, S. N., 369
Harris-Bowlsbey, J., 205, 460
Hart, C. M. D., 660
Hartman, R. O., 312
Hartung, P. J., 83, 93, 96–97, 98,
99, 102, 103, 105, 106,
223, 235, 434, 479, 480,
509, 510, 584
Harvey, J., 98, 99, 611
Haskins, R., 259
Hastings, S., 375
Hausafus, C. O., 555
Haushner, O., 460
Hausmann, R., 187, 188
Haverkamp, B. E., 412

Haviland, M. L., 411
Haynie, J. M., 670
Healy, C., 577
Healy, C. C., 83, 87
Hebl, M. R., 276
Heckhausen, J., 162, 601
Heggestad, E. D., 65, 308, 390,
392, 477
Heidbreder, E., 451
Heinz, W. R., 168
Heller, D., 313, 491, 626, 627
Helson, R., 432
Hemmingway, M. A., 641
Hendel, D. D., 425, 434
Henderson, S., 548
Hendra, R., 671
Henley, G. A., 39, 422
Heppen, J., 340
Heppner, M. J., 187, 189, 191,
197, 246, 251, 258, 266,
574, 579, 584, 668
Heppner, P. P., 189, 574, 584
Herma, J., 86, 422
Herma, J. L., 540
Hernandez, B., 362
Herr, E. L., 98, 232, 542
Herrera, C., 338
Hershenson, D., 360
Hershenson, D. B., 133, 360,
368, 371
Herzberg, F., 420
Herzog, L., 332
Hesketh, B., 22, 43, 44, 47, 221,
548, 664
Hetherington, C., 275, 277, 280
Heymann, J., 198
Heywood, J., 200
Hezlett, S., 466
Higgins, C. A., 315, 430
Highhouse, S., 612, 613
Hill, A., 670
Hill, C. E., 586
Hill, J. M. M., 540
Hill, N. E., 333
Hill, R., 451
Hill, S. T., 193
Hillerbrand, E., 275
Hinkelman, J. M., 548
Hirschi, A., 68, 97, 299, 310,
311, 510, 567, 573
Hitch, J. L., 512
Hitchings, W. E., 372
Hochwarter, W. A., 423
Hodges, N., 599, 601
Hodgson, K. K., 337
Hoekstra, H., 87, 92, 99, 106
Hoffman, B. J., 432
Hoffman, T. D., 257
Hoffner, C. A., 510
Hofstede, G., 418, 440
Hogan, R., 153
Hogan, R. T., 301
Høglend, P., 584
Holland, J., 459
Holland, J. E., 481, 580

687

Holland, J. L., 55–56, 57, 59, 61,
62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68,
69, 70, 73, 74, 84, 85, 87,
104, 153–154, 155, 167,
218, 248, 277, 308, 388,
395, 396, 397, 398, 408,
411, 429, 481, 482, 487,
490, 493, 513, 514, 553,
580, 628
Hollingshead, A. A., 246
Holloway, S. D., 336
Holmberg, K., 73, 398, 408
Holmes, M., 550
Holt, M. K., 339
Holzer, H., 659
Holzer, H. J., 259
Honzik, M., 455
Hood, M., 97, 480, 606
Hooker, S., 340
Hopkins, N., 471
Hoppock, R., 507
Hopps, J., 246
Hopwood, C. J., 405
Horn, J., 453
Horn, L., 364
Horner, S., 453
Horvath, M., 372
Hough, L. M., 606
Houtenville, A., 362
Howard, C., 225, 230
Howard, K., 331
Howard, K. A. S., 233, 287
Hoyt, K. B., 555
Hsieh, C., 261
Hsu, A. J., 602
Hu, R. S. C., 395
Huang, T. C., 602
Huang, X., 599, 600
Huang, Y., 228
Hubert, L., 65, 67, 219
Hudson, F. M., 656
Hughey, K., 556
Hui, C. H., 67, 434
Hulin, C. L., 41, 625
Hull, W., 658
Hunger, J., 281
Hunt, E., 449
Hunter, J., 458, 641
Hurlic, D., 431
Hutchens, T., 311
Hutcheson, K., 232
Hutchinson, N. L., 526
Hutton, C. C., 369
Huynh, T. K., 359
Hyde, J. S., 193, 201, 456, 457
Hyne, S. A., 396, 459, 465, 484
Ian Glendon, A., 307
Ihle-Helledy, K., 233
Ilies, R., 312, 313, 623, 626, 627
Impara, J., 460
Ingram, K. M., 275
Ironson, G. H., 625
Irving, T. S., 192
Isaacs, J., 259

688

Author Index

Israel, T., 288
Ivancevich, J. M., 660
Jackson, D. N., 491
Jackson, J., 555
Jackson, M. A., 341
Jackson, S. E., 98
Jaidi, Y., 610
James, B. N., 565
James, R. M., 568
James, T., 545
Janeiro, I. N., 545
Jarrett, J. A., 661
Jeanneret, E. A., 418
Jelinek, M., 636–637
Jencks, C., 457
Jensen, A. R., 450
Jepsen, D. A., 87, 101, 102
Jernigan, M., 232–233
Jin, J., 417, 431, 432
Jin, L., 311, 312
Jingeleski, J., 548
Jobin-Davis, K., 550
Johnson, D. E., 638
Johnson, E., 602, 611
Johnson, E. C., 431
Johnson, J. M., 193
Johnson, L. K., 636
Johnson, M., 376
Johnson, M. K., 552
Johnson, R. E., 642
Johnston, J. A., 69, 73, 191, 197,
308
Jome, L.-M., 196, 311, 595
Jones, B., 542
Jones, B. J., 102
Jones, E. M., 308
Jones, J. E., 449
Jones, J. M., 259
Jones, J. V., 614
Jonesa, G., 550
Jordaan, J. P., 86, 88, 480
Jordan, K. M., 281
Jordan, N. C., 259
Jordan, T. E., 510
Josselson, R., 170
Juby, H. L., 577
Judge, T. A., 312, 313, 315, 417,
430, 431, 491, 623, 626,
627
Jung, K., 217
Juntunen, C. L., 47, 227, 245,
246, 261, 263, 265, 267,
550, 574
Kabbas, C. P., 546
Kacanski, J. M., 341
Kacmar, K. M., 201
Kaewchinda, M., 553
Kahn, R. L., 635
Kahn, S. E., 259
Kahneman, D., 626
Kalil, A., 660
Kalleberg, A. L., 149

Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D., 547
Kampa-Kokesch, S., 278
Kanfer, R., 313, 420, 509, 596,
605, 606, 607, 608, 609,
610, 611
Kantamneni, N., 67, 215, 216,
219, 220, 226, 498
Kantrowitz, T. M., 313, 509, 596
Kao, C. F., 369
Kaplan, S., 376
Kaplan, S. J., 613
Kardash, C. A. M., 552
Karpova, E., 599, 601
Karunanayake, D., 231
Karvonen, M., 370
Kasheﬁ, M., 434
Katayama, M., 276
Katz, D., 635
Katz, M. R., 523
Kaufman, J., 455
Kaufman Kantor, G., 339
Kauh, T. J., 338
Kayson, M., 567
Kelchner, K., 370
Keller, B. K., 332, 333, 334, 573
Keller, J., 153
Kelly, A. R., 507
Kelly, G. A., 90, 101
Kelly, K. R., 225, 230, 493, 581
Kelvin, P., 661
Kemmelmeier, M., 434
Kemple, J. J., 340
Kendall, L. M., 41, 625
Kenny, M. E., 223, 232–233,
261, 329, 330, 331, 332,
333, 334, 336, 337, 338,
341, 555, 556
Kerka, S., 667
Kern, J. H., 345
Ketzenberger, K., 281
Keys, C., 362
Khan, S. B., 61
Khatiwada, I., 256
Kidd, J. M., 479
Kidney, B., 88–89
Kies, A. L., 335
Kilbreath, L., 526
Kim, B. S. K., 226, 578
Kim, J., 546
Kim, S., 550
Kindaichi, M. M., 232
King, E. B., 345
King, V., 606
Kinicki, A. J., 606
Kirby, L. K., 491
Kirkwood, K. J., 61
Kitson, H. D., 171
Klehe, U., 611, 612, 613
Klehe, U. C., 97
Kleiman, T., 494
Kleven, M., 455
Knapp, L., 468
Knapp, R., 468
Knapp-Lee, L., 468
Knasel, E. G., 86, 97, 479, 661

Kneubuehl, J., 367
Knokey, A., 357, 358
Knowdell, R., 459
Knox, W. E., 432
Kobrin, J., 464
Kochenderfer, B. J., 547
Koehly, L. M., 568
Koen, J., 97, 611, 612, 613
Köller, O., 601
Kolly, S., 574
Komarraju, M., 220
Kondo, C. T., 613
Konrad, A. M., 363, 433
Kopelman, R. E., 440
Kosciulek, J., 375
Kosciulek, J. F., 550, 552
Kozberg, J. G., 408
Kracke, B., 334
Krausz, M., 493, 509, 581
Kregel, J., 376
Kress, H. M., 330
Krieshok, T., 460
Krieshok, T. S., 73, 172, 375,
654
Krishnamurty, P., 469
Kristof, A., 431
Kristof-Brown, A. L., 430–431
Kritis, K. J., 103
Krueger, H., 551
Krumboltz, J. D., 251, 252, 282,
668, 671
Kruse, S. J., 103, 438, 439
Kucinkas, S. K., 469
Kucker, M., 528
Kuhn, T. S., 166
Kuncel, N., 466
Kuncel, N. R., 299
Ladany, N., 546
Ladd, G. W., 547
Läge, D., 567, 573
Lahey, J., 602, 611
Lambert, A. J., 285
Lambert, L. E., 550
Lambert, M. J., 586
Lamon, S. J., 456
Lance, C. E., 432
Landgraf, R., 553
Landy, F. J., 40
Lane, I. M., 623
Langford, C. W., 641
Lapan, R., 331, 336, 339
Lapan, R. T., 528, 539, 540, 541,
543, 546, 548, 549, 550,
552, 555, 556, 557, 567
Lapour, A., 246
Larson, L. M., 65, 130, 308, 309,
391, 399, 490
Lasoff, D. L., 566
Latham, G. P., 487
Lattimore, J., 371
LaValley, M. P., 374
Law, A. L., 189
Law, C. L., 276, 287
Lawrence-Lightfoot, S., 177

Author Index

Le, H., 555
Lease, S. H., 45, 196
Leasher, M. K., 604
Lee, C., 359
Lee, D., 579
Lee, F. K., 607
Lee, K., 199, 200
Lee, M. D., 96
Lee, R., 667, 668, 674
Lee, S., 228
Lee, W. V., 411
Lehavot, K., 285
Lehmann, T., 369
Lehmann, W., 261
Leiter, M., 675
Lens, W., 609
Lent, R., 167, 251, 252
Lent, R. W., 1, 17, 23, 40, 44, 67,
102, 103, 115, 116, 120,
122, 124, 127, 128, 129,
130, 131, 132, 133, 134,
136, 137, 138, 139, 141,
142, 194, 205, 224, 225,
229, 282, 283, 329, 332,
346, 458, 459, 460, 483,
484, 485, 486, 487, 488,
495, 496, 498, 621, 623,
629, 633, 637, 643, 665,
666, 672
Lentz, E., 344
Lentz, H., 599, 601
Lenz, J., 549
Lenz, J. G., 673–674
Leong, F. T. L., 103, 218, 220,
228–229, 235, 434
Leontiev, A. N., 155
LePine, J. A., 314, 637, 638
Lerner, R. M., 106, 124, 249,
251, 329
Leung, S. A., 68, 69, 234, 546,
548
Leuty, M. E., 403, 404
Leuwerke, W. C., 486, 507,
524
Levine, P., 358
Levine, S. C., 259
Levy, F., 470
Lewin, K., 104
Lewis, D. M., 102, 103, 105
Lewis, J., 574
Lewis, J. A., 289
Lewis, P., 65, 437, 514,
524
Li, J., 336
Li, L. C., 226, 578
Li, N., 314, 640
Li, Q., 541
Liang, B., 338
Liang, T. H., 226, 578
Liao, H.-Y., 437
Librowsky, I., 460
Lidal, I. B., 359
Lidderdale, M. A., 283
Lieb, P., 433
Liesener, J., 360

Lievens, F., 600
Lightsey, O. R., Jr., 673
Lima, L., 344
Lin, H., 598
Lindberg, S., 457
Lindeman, R. H., 86, 480
Lindley, L., 492
Lindley, L. D., 133, 309, 391,
492
Lindsay, P., 432
Lindstrom, L. E., 372
Lindzey, G., 419
Lingl, A., 303
Linn, M., 457
Linn, M. C., 193, 457
Linn, S. G., 191
Littman-Ovadia, H., 575
Liu, J. P., 335
Liu, S., 96
Liu, W., 257, 267
Liu, W. M., 246, 253, 256, 257,
267
Liu, X., 556
Liu, Z., 332
Locke, E. A., 431, 487,
623
Lockwood, A., 661
Loewy, M. I., 289
Lofquist, L. H., 30, 36, 39, 40,
41, 42, 46, 85, 167, 248,
279, 368, 388, 418, 421,
422, 424, 425, 426, 429,
434, 435, 516, 621, 623,
625, 634, 642
Long, K. L., 529
Loony, L. B., 335
Lopes, V. B., 546
Lopez, A. M., 205, 225
Lopez, F. G., 205, 225
Loprest, P., 362–363, 372
Lorah, P., 276, 286, 287
Lorence, J., 432
Lott, B., 246, 257–258
Lounsbury, J. W., 311
Love, R., 546
Lovelace, K., 221
Loveland, J. M., 311
Low, J., 405
Low, K. S. D., 66
Lowmaster, S. E., 405
Lubinski, D., 195, 392
Lucas, J. L., 311
Luciana, M., 390
Ludwig, J., 259
Luecking, R., 374
Luksyte, A., 612
Lumsden, J. A., 673–674
Luna, M., 545
Lustig, D., 370
Luthans, F., 131
Luyckx, K., 309
Luzzo, D., 232
Luzzo, D. A., 372, 545
Lykken, D., 627, 629

689

Lyons, H. Z., 42, 46, 203, 221,
278, 279
Lyons, S., 430
Maag, E., 358, 362–363, 372
Mabe, P, III, 459
MacDonald-Wilson, K., 366
MacFarlane, J., 455
Macharey, G., 372
MacIver, D., 332
MacKay, W. R., 259
Macnab, D., 422
Maddox, T., 460
Maeaettae, S., 550
Magley, V. J., 200
Majava, E. M., 550
Malecki, C. K., 337
Malmberg-Heimonen, I., 614
Malrieu, P., 172
Manning, J. L., 275
Manzi, A., 331
Manzi, A. J., 330
Mao, S., 246, 257–258
Marjoribanks, K., 555
Markham, W. T., 507, 508
Marks, N. F., 342
Markus, H., 543
Marshall, S. K., 202, 218
Marshall-Mies, J., 452
Martin, G. A., 568
Martin, H., 405
Martin, J. K., 434
Martin, L. G., 659, 671
Martin, R., 302
Martinez, L. R., 276
Martz, E., 359
Marzano, R. J., 571
Masdonati, J., 567, 573, 574
Maslach, C., 98, 675
Maslow, A., 149
Maslow, A. H., 2–4, 419, 420
Mason-Chagil, G., 555
Massoudi, K., 567, 573, 574
Matlin, N., 88
Mattern, K., 464
Matthews, C., 275, 289
Matthiesen, S. B., 346
Matyja, A., 480
Mau, W., 576, 577, 581
Maurer, T. J., 65, 530
Mausner, B., 420
McAdams, D. P., 148, 149, 151,
155, 165
McCaulley, M. H., 490
McCloy, R., 425, 437, 516, 524,
527
McCloy, R. A., 437
McCrae, R. R., 300, 301, 302,
303, 304, 307, 308, 316,
322, 433, 490
McCrindle, A. R., 510
McCrohan, N ., 369
McCullough, J. D., 602
McCusker, C., 434
McDaniels, C., 542

690

Author Index

McDavis, R. J., 288
McFadden, K., 668
McFarland, W. P., 289
McGrew, K., 453, 454
McHale, S. M., 333
McHenry, J. J., 395
McKay, R. A., 172
McKee-Ryan, F. M., 606, 611
McKelley, R. A., 195
McKenzie, R., 606
McLanahan, S., 198
McMahon, H. G., 528
McMahon, M., 510, 541
McMaken, J., 338
McPartland, E. B., 317, 584, 613,
614, 633, 667, 670
McVay, J. P., 423
McWhaw, K., 552
McWhirter, E. H., 21, 134, 207,
228, 232, 260, 265, 275,
336, 343, 344, 495
McWhirter, E. W., 245
Mead, S., 367
Meara, N. M., 574
Medvide, M. B., 329
Meier, L. L., 342
Meir, E. I., 64, 68, 219, 547
Melamed, S., 547
Melincoff, D. S., 546
Mendenhall, R., 660, 670
Mendez, L. M. R., 548
Mercer, S. H., 336
Mercier, L. R., 345
Mervielde, I., 308
Meschede, T., 254
Metheny, J., 336
Metz, A. J., 233, 449
Meuser, K. T., 367
Meyer, I. H., 289
Miles, J. R., 281
Millar, R., 510, 511
Miller, A. R., 198
Miller, C., 670
Miller, C. A., 259
Miller, C. D., 574
Miller, C. E., 604
Miller, D. S., 21
Miller, G. A., 162
Miller, J., 434
Miller, M. J., 565
Miller, P. S., 365
Miloslavic, S. A., 642
Milsom, A. S., 658, 659
Mindes, E. J., 275
Miner, C. U., 106
Minor, C. W., 17
Minuchin, S., 334
Miranda, M. J., 426
Mirvis, P. H., 151
Mischel, W., 154
Mitchell, K., 285
Miyazaki, I., 449
Moane, G., 432
Mobley, M., 277
Mofﬁtt, T. E., 305

Mohler, C. J., 66, 67
Mohr, J. J., 568
Mokomane, Z., 198
Mooijaart, A., 342, 343
Moore, M. E., 363, 373
Moore, S., 546
Moore, W., 469
Moorman, L., 541
Moreno, M. L. R., 531
Moreno-Jiménez, B., 346
Morey, L. C., 405
Morf, C. C., 154
Morgeson, F. P., 509, 641
Mori, A. A., 372
Morris, M. A., 490
Morris, M. L., 57, 514
Morrow, S. L., 116, 133, 282, 283
Mortensen, E., 455
Mortimer, J. T., 262, 267, 338,
432, 550, 551
Moser, K., 98, 608
Moss, W., 658
Motowidlo, S. J., 635, 636, 639,
641
Mount, M. K., 301, 308, 313,
314, 391, 491, 626, 640
Mowbray, C. T., 369
Mowsesian, R., 64, 68
Moye, N. A., 641
Mullins, J., 149, 157
Multon, K. D., 131, 668
Mumford, M. D., 418
Munson, H. L., 547
Munson, W. W., 546
Murnane, R., 470
Murphy, K. A., 669, 670, 674
Murphy, L., 460
Murray, H. A., 419
Murtland, C., 507
Mutanen, P., 614
Myers, I. B., 490, 491
Myers, R. A., 86, 480
Myers, R. M., 103
Nabors, L. A., 372
Nafukho, F. M., 669, 670
Naidoo, A. V., 545
Naimark, H., 547
Nakai, Y., 610
Nakamoto, J., 339
Nauta, A., 97, 611, 612, 613
Nauta, M. M., 55, 64, 231, 248,
281, 312
Navarro, R. L., 196, 225, 228
Nave, O., 148
Near, J. P., 635
Neisser, U., 457, 458
Neubert, D. A., 364
Neuman, J. L., 395, 404
Neuman, Y., 148
Nevill, D. D., 40, 86, 99, 103,
104, 105, 106, 438, 439,
488
Nevill, S., 364
Neville, D., 488

Newman, L., 357, 358
Ng, A. V., 405
Ng, E. S. W., 363
Ng, T. W. H., 299
Nichols, G. C., 578
Nichols, R. C., 65
Nicholson, N., 656
Nielsen, M. B., 346
Niles, S., 106, 460
Niles, S. G., 98, 102, 103, 105,
106, 205, 310
Nilsen, D. C., 459, 465
Nilsen, D. L., 396, 484
Nilsson, J. E., 281
Nirje, B., 370
Niu, J., 374
Noordzij, G., 596, 613
Nord, W. R., 417, 430
Nosek, B. A., 190
Nota, L., 67
Nurius, P., 543
Nurmi, J. E., 550
Nutter, K. J., 395
O’Brien, K. M., 42, 191, 203,
221, 225, 228, 251, 258,
266, 278, 279, 344, 568,
569
Ochs, L. A., 369, 372
O’Connell, D. J., 661
Ogbu, J., 337
O’Grady, K. E., 338
Oh, I. S., 314, 640
O’Hara, R. P., 280
Ojeda, L., 228, 232
Oleski, D., 68
Oliver, L. W., 566, 569, 570,
572
Oliver, M., 254
Olson, B. D., 148, 151, 155, 165
Olson, L. S., 331
O’Neil, J. M., 189
O’Neil, M. E., 275, 286, 336
Ones, D., 466
Orenstein, J., 595
Organ, D. W., 303, 635, 636
Orr, D. T., 584
O’Ryan, L. W., 289
Orzag, P., 362
Osborne, W. L., 106
Osipow, S. H., 102, 103,
228–229, 493, 497, 509,
546, 581
Ostroff, C., 430
Oswald, F. L., 524, 635
Ougrin, D., 405
Overstreet, P. L., 97, 101
Owen, A., 375
Oyserman, D., 434
Pabian, Y., 332, 556
Padula, M., 658
Paganos, R. J., 369
Paine, J. B., 636

Author Index

Paisley, P. O., 528
Palma, T., 331
Palmer, S. B., 371
Pan, T., 261
Pantzer, K. M., 68–69
Park, H., 579
Park, J., 344
Parker, R., 373
Parrish, T. J., 40, 41, 623
Parsons, F., 9, 21, 24, 29, 85,
104, 368, 460, 507, 548
Parsons, S., 260, 309
Pastorelli, C., 260
Paterson, D., 451
Patterson, B., 464
Patterson, J., 359
Patton, G. K., 623
Patton, M. J., 574
Patton, W., 134, 550
Patton, W. A., 510
Paul, K. B., 625
Paul, K. I., 98
Pearce, M., 218
Pearce, S., 547
Pearlman, K., 458
Pearson, S. M., 227, 233
Pebdani, R., 357
Pedlow, S., 469
Peiró, J. M., 611
Pendergrass, L. A., 395, 404
Pepper, S. M., 276, 286, 287
Perdrix, S., 567, 573, 574, 577
Perdue, S. V., 69
Perez, P., 188
Perna, L., 335, 340
Perrewe, P. L., 423
Perrone, K. M., 332
Perry, J. C., 245, 332, 333, 337,
555, 556, 585, 586
Peterson, C. H., 555
Peterson, G. W., 69, 311, 529,
549, 673–674
Peterson, N. G., 418
Phillips, J. C., 275, 569
Phillips, J. M., 486
Phillips, M., 457
Phillips, S. D., 100, 550, 595
Piaget, J., 549
Pickering, D. J., 571
Pickett, T., Jr., 246
Pierce, J. R., 639
Pierce, K. A., 372
Pierce, M. E., 555
Pietrantonio, K. R., 245
Pintrich, P. R., 552
Plake, B., 460
Plamondon, K. E., 637
Platt, M. G., 669
Pledger, C., 357
Plojaz, A., 196
Podsakoff, P. M., 639
Pollock, J. E., 571
Ponterotto, J. G., 228
Pope, M., 17, 285
Pope, M. L., 510

Pope, M. S., 285
Porfeli, E., 666
Porfeli, E. J., 93, 97, 162, 479,
481, 510
Porter, S. R., 395
Posthuma, R. A., 509
Poston, J. M., 405
Poteet, M. L., 344
Potoczniak, M. J., 285
Powell, A., 459, 461
Powell, A. B., 57
Powell, D. F., 545
Power, P., 373, 482, 493
Power, P. G., 63
Prediger, D., 459
Prediger, D. J., 59, 62, 71, 310,
514
Preenan, P. T. Y., 499
Prezioso, M. S., 332
Pribram, K. H., 162
Price, R., 614
Price, R. H., 29, 613, 614
Prideaux, L., 134
Priess, H. A., 456
Priﬁtera, A., 457
Prime, D. R., 542
Prince, J. P., 275, 280, 285, 286
Pritchard, R. D., 420
Proctor, B. D., 245
Prosser, E. C., 654
Provencher, H. L., 367
Pryor, G. L., 655–656
Pulakos, E. D., 637
Putzstuck, C., 658
Quenk, N. L., 490
Quinn, D. M., 192
Rachlin, K., 287
Rachman, D., 65
Ragins, B. R., 278
Rahardja, D., 584
Rain, J. S., 623
Randahl, G. J., 412
Rangel, U., 153
Ransford, H. E., 434
Rasheed, S., 134
Ratner, D., 656, 657
Ratts, M. J., 289
Rau, B. L., 96
Rawles, R., 545
Reardon, R., 575, 586
Reardon, R. C., 69, 308, 311,
549, 673–674
Rebus, P. J., 337
Rector, C. C., 311, 321, 582, 583
Redline, J., 600
Reed, M. B., 307
Reed, P. A., 507, 508
Reese, R. J., 574
Regenold, M., 369
Renfro-Michel, E. L., 43
Repetti, R. L., 337
Retish, P., 372

691

Revell, W. G., 363, 376
Reynolds, A. L., 276
Rhoades, L., 346, 628
Ribatti, D., 449
Rice, K. G., 332, 334
Richards, J. M., 61, 62
Richardson, M. S., 6, 99,
191, 330, 341, 343, 347,
487
Richman, P., 201
Ricoeur, P., 164
Riedel, S., 489
Rigby, K., 547
Riggle, E. D. B., 289
Ristow, R. S., 372
Ritchie, J. E., 433
Rivera, L. M., 228, 232, 340
Rivkin, D., 65, 437, 514, 524
Robbins, S., 663, 667, 668,
674
Robbins, S. B., 66, 68, 555, 576,
653
Robert, T., 43
Roberts, B. W., 66, 299, 300,
301, 302, 305, 311,
314–315, 316, 395, 431
Robertson, I. T., 131
Robinson, C. H., 434, 439
Rochlen, A. B., 195, 568
Rodrı́guez-Muñoz, A., 346
Roe, A., 85, 331
Roe, R. A., 419
Roehling, M. V., 607
Roessler, R. T., 369, 372
Rogers, C. R., 88
Rogers, E. S., 367
Rogers, M. E., 307, 310, 312
Rohan, M. J., 418
Rohr, E., 507, 508
Roid, G., 457
Rojewski, J. W., 372, 555
Rokeach, M., 419, 420, 421, 438,
440
Ronen, S., 422, 431
Ros, M., 422
Rosario, M., 281
Rosen, B., 221
Rosen, D., 73, 398, 408
Rosenbaum, J. E., 600
Rosenberg, M., 161
Ross, J., 626
Rossier, J., 567, 574
Rostosky, S. S., 289
Rothbard, N. P., 487
Rothe, H. F., 626
Rothstein, M., 491
Rottinghaus, P. J., 65, 130, 308,
309, 391, 477, 480, 482,
484, 489, 490, 492
Rotundo, M., 314, 458, 635, 637,
639
Rounds, J., 65, 66, 67, 219, 221,
248, 409–410, 417, 418,
423, 431, 432, 437

692

Author Index

Rounds, J. B., 29, 39, 50, 64, 67,
392, 396, 422, 424, 435,
514, 580, 628
Rounsley, C. A., 286
Rousseau, D. M., 655
Rovenpor, J. L., 440
Rowe, R., 433
Rubenstein, B. J., 547
Rudolph, J. R., 281
Ruggs, E. N., 276
Ruh, D., 658
Russell, D. W., 369
Russell, S. L., 335
Rust, J. P., 341
Rutter, M. E., 614
Ryan, J. M., 67
Ryan, N. E., 565, 570, 572, 573,
577, 633
Ryan Krane, N. E., 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 70, 206, 317, 321,
511, 583
Sacker, A., 260
Sackett, P., 458
Sackett, P. R., 314, 635, 637, 639
Sadri, G., 131
Sagie, A., 422
Saka, N., 493, 581, 582, 583, 588
Saks, A. M., 42, 44, 509,
596–597, 606, 608, 610
Salami, S. O., 309
Salgado, J. F., 301, 640
Salgado, S., 232
Salomone, P. R., 95, 580
Salzer, M. S., 376
Sampson, J. P., 549, 673–674
Sampson, J. P., Jr., 311
Sanchez, B., 338
Sanford, E., 223
Sanz Vergel, A. I., 346
Sargent, L. D., 96
Sarreira, J. C., 546
Saunders, D. E., 311
Saunders, J. L., 260, 265
Savage, M., 334
Savickas, M., 330, 488
Savickas, M. L., 3, 4, 13, 21, 83,
84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 95,
96–97, 100, 101, 102,
103, 106, 147, 149, 157,
159, 162, 166, 167, 168,
172, 173, 223–224, 249,
250, 346, 371, 400, 403,
479, 480, 481, 499, 543,
586, 665
Sawhill, I., 259
Scales, J. E., 577
Scanlan, K. R. L., 68–69
Scaringi, V., 195
Schaefer, M. B., 340
Schaffer, R. H., 422
Schaller, J., 359
Schaller, J. L., 373
Schanzenbach, D. W., 259
Schaub, M., 131, 312

Schaubhut, N. A., 57, 490, 514
Schaufeli, W., 675
Scheel, M. J., 68
Schell, J., 284
Schifano, R., 483
Schilt, K., 287
Schlossberg, N. K., 655, 656,
670
Schmidt, A. M., 496, 627
Schmidt, C. K., 281
Schmidt, F., 458
Schmidt, F. L., 410, 640, 641
Schneider, M., 29, 480
Schneider, M. S., 281
Schoon, I., 260, 264, 309
Schoonhoven, C. B., 636–637
Schrimshaw, E. W., 281
Schroeder, D. H ., 450
Schulenberg, J., 546
Schulenberg, J. E., 106, 124,
249, 251
Schulenberg, J. W., 329
Schultheiss, D., 330, 342, 347
Schultheiss, D. E., 487
Schultheiss, D. E. P., 196–197,
289, 330, 331, 343, 346,
347, 348
Schultheiss, D. P., 332
Schultz, K. S., 96
Schulz, R., 162
Schwartz, D., 339
Schwartz, M., 370
Schwartz, S., 159, 430
Schwartz, S. H., 418, 422, 424,
427, 440
Schyns, B., 312
Scott, J., 264
Scullard, M. G., 394
Sedikides, C., 153
Seidman, E., 550
Sekaran, U., 220
Selden, S., 595
Seltzer, J., 261, 336
Selvidge, M. M. D., 288
Semmer, N. K., 342
Senecal, C., 370
Seraﬁca, F. C., 103, 497, 546
Sexton, T. L., 566
Shaﬁr, U., 369
Shah, M., 258, 263
Shahane, A., 344
Shaller, M., 189
Shanahan, M. J., 550, 551
Shapiro, E. G., 434
Shapiro, T., 254
Shapiro, T. M., 254
Sharf, R. S., 551
Sharma, R., 362
Shartle, C. L., 507, 508
Shaw, E., 464
Shaw, J. D., 201
Shayne, L., 511, 576
Sheldon, K.M., 432
Shepherd, D., 670
Sherman, M. F., 369

Sheu, H., 124, 130, 131, 133, 629
Sheu, H. B., 205, 225
Shevlin, M., 510, 511
Shiloh, S., 459, 460
Shiner, R., 299
Shiner, R. L., 300
Shipler, D. K., 246, 259
Shirom, A., 614
Shivy, V. A., 568
Shoffner, M. F., 45, 46
Shore, L. M., 628
Shore, T. H., 628
Shullman, S. L., 284
Siegler, R. S., 549
Silling, S. M., 159
Silsby, J., 333
Silva, M. A., 546
Silvonen, J., 614
Simon, B. D., 338
Simon, T., 450
Simpson, A., 658, 661, 670
Singh, R., 278
Sitlington, P., 364
Skinner, B. F., 422
Skorikov, V., 545
Skorikov, V. B., 309, 546
Slack, A. K., 627
Slane, S., 628
Slaney, R. B., 277
Slattery, S. M., 344
Slebarska, K., 608, 609
Slee, P. T., 547
Slemon, J. C., 369
Sloan, P. E., 542
Sloan, T., 245
Sloane, P. J., 200
Smith, A. V., 411
Smith, C. A., 635, 636
Smith, F. M., 555
Smith, J., 196
Smith, J. C., 245
Smith, L., 246, 257–258
Smith, N., 654
Smith, N. G., 275
Smith, P., 484
Smith, P. C., 41, 625
Smith, P. L., 205, 219, 225, 484
Smith, T., 65
Snell, A. F., 610
Snizek, W. E., 433
Snow, R., 451, 452
Snyderman, B., 420
Soenens, B., 309
Sokolova, O., 261
Solamon, J. M., 530
Solberg, V. S., 483
Soleck, G., 246, 253, 256, 257,
267
Song, Z., 597, 606
Sonnenberg, R. T., 68
Sorensen, K. L., 299
Sorenson, S., 597
Soresi, S., 67
Sousa-Poza, A., 201
Spanierman, L. B., 219, 220

Author Index

Sparks, E., 232–233
Spearman, C., 450, 453
Spector, P. E., 623
Speer, D., 507, 508
Spencer, R., 338
Spencer, S. J., 192
Spicer, P., 658
Spiegler, S., 507
Spies, R., 460
Spindel, L. J., 660
Spitzmueller, C., 612
Spokane, A., 671
Spokane, A. R., 64, 68, 204, 400,
566, 569, 570, 572
Spranger, E., 421
Spurk, D., 312
Staff, J., 262
Staggs, G. D., 391
Stajkovic, A. D., 131
Stangor, C., 189
Stanton, J. M., 606, 608
Stapleton, M., 360
Starishevsky, R., 88
Starkey, M., 553
Starr, J., 456
Stauffer, S., 567
Staw, B. M., 626
Steel, P., 199, 200
Steele, C. M., 192, 259
Steiner, D. D., 623
Stensrud, R., 376
Stephens, J., 18, 321, 575, 668
Sternberg, R., 455
Stevens, C. K., 607
Stevenson, M. R., 284
Stewart, D., 489
Stewart, G. L., 491
Stokes, G. S., 67
Stone, C., 528
Strahan, R. F., 62
Strang, R., 508
Strauser, D., 370, 374
Strohl, J., 654
Strong, E. K., Jr., 392, 393, 395,
398, 410
Struch, N., 440
Su, R., 409–410
Subich, L. M., 60, 68, 131, 132,
255
Sue, D. W., 288, 345
Suizzo, M.-A., 195
Sullivan, B. A., 308, 390, 391,
400, 402, 403
Sullivan, L., 254
Suls, J., 302
Sum, A., 256
Sung, Y., 452, 553
Super, C., 488
Super, C. M., 3, 83, 223, 249,
371, 543, 665
Super, D., 371, 488
Super, D. E., 3, 40, 83, 84, 85,
86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93,
94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 102, 103, 104, 105,

106, 149, 150, 156, 167,
223, 249, 280, 329, 331,
342, 371, 420, 422, 423,
424, 426, 427, 429, 438,
439, 479, 480, 482, 487,
488, 543, 661, 665
Surkiss, S., 422
Sverko, B., 102, 103, 424, 426,
427, 429, 438
Swaney, K. B., 57
Swanson, J., 393, 400, 671
Swanson, J. L., 29, 30, 35, 40, 42,
44, 47, 66, 130, 232, 393,
494, 495
Szymanski, E. M., 133, 357, 359,
363, 368, 370, 372, 373,
374
Taber, B., 106
Taber, B. J., 223, 400
Tan, C. S., 95
Tang, M., 219, 225, 229, 411
Taris, T. W., 606
Tarulli, B. A., 65
Taveira, M. D. C., 531
Taylor, K. M., 483
Tebbe, E. N., 287
Telander, K., 131, 643
Tellegen, A., 302–303, 391, 627,
629, 633
Terman, L., 450
Test, D. W., 370
Tett, R. P., 491
Thompson, A. S., 86, 98, 480
Thompson, C., 455
Thompson, M. N., 255
Thompson, R., 339
Thompson, R. C., 57, 490, 514
Thoresen, C. J., 315, 623
Thorpe, G., 456
Thurstone, L., 453
Tiedeman, D. V., 280
Tierney, W. G., 334
Tillman, D., 367
Tinsley, T. J., 580
Tipton, L. C., 191
Tobin, R. M., 555
Tokar, D. M., 60, 131, 196, 312,
495, 569
Tomasik, M., 601
Tomlinson, M. J., 281
Ton, M., 395
Toops, H., 451
Toporek, R. L., 289, 603
Torres, D. M., 232
Tovar-Murray, D., 283
Tracey, T., 471
Tracey, T. J., 29, 219, 435
Tracey, T. J. G., 64, 66, 67, 68,
76, 220, 226, 308
Tramayne, S., 131, 643
Tranberg, M., 628
Triandis, H. C., 434
Trilling, B., 470
Troxtel, D. D., 530

693

Trueba, H., 363
Truxillo, D. M., 611
Try, S., 597, 599
Tsabari, O., 64, 68, 219, 226
Tsai, W. C., 602
Tso, G. K. F., 595
Tuch, S. A., 434
Tucker, B., 550
Tufﬁn, K., 548
Turban, D. B., 607, 608
Turner, N., 627
Turner, S., 548, 552
Turner, S. L., 528, 539, 540, 541,
549, 553, 555, 579
Turnley, W. H., 643
Twenge, J. M., 432
Tyler, J. M., 602
Tyson, D. F., 333
Tyson, K., 337
Tyson, L. D., 187, 188
Tziner, A., 64, 219
Ullman, J. B., 337
Ulven, J. C., 654
Umbach, P. D., 395
Usher, C. H., 106
Valach, L., 202, 218
Valdez, M., 232
van der Flier, H., 606
van der Kloot, W. A., 440
van der Molen, H. T., 604
VanderWal, B. L., 284
Van Dyne, L., 314, 637, 638
Van Esbroeck, R., 477
Van Hooft, E. A. J., 596, 600,
606, 610, 611–612, 613
Van Hoye, G., 596–597, 600,
607
van Ryn, M., 613
Van Scotter, J. R., 639
van Steenbergen, E. F., 342, 343
Vansteenkiste, M., 609
Van Vianen, A. E. M., 97, 499,
611, 612, 613
van Zielst, J., 604
Vauclair, C., 418
Vaughan, K., 658
Vaux, A., 489
Velez, A. D., 219, 220
Vera, E. M., 341
Vernon, P. E., 419, 421
Verquer, M. L., 431
Vetter, L., 658
Viechtbauer, W., 300
Vignoli, E., 332
Villado, A. J., 431
Vinokur, A., 614
Vinokur, A. D., 613, 614
von Collani, G., 312
Vondracek, F., 666
Vondracek, F. W., 93, 106, 124,
249, 251, 309, 329, 510,
545, 546

694

Author Index

von Schrader, S., 359, 362
von Suchodoletz, W., 372
Vough, H. C., 96
Vroom, V. H., 7, 485
Vuolo, M., 262
Vuori, J., 614
Vygotsky, L. S., 155
Wagner, M., 357, 358
Wagner, M. M., 358
Wagner, S. H., 431
Waldfogel, J., 198
Waldo, C. R., 278
Walkdo, C. R., 200
Wallace, B. C., 232
Wallace, C., 550
Wallace, R. L., 568
Wallace-Broscious, A., 497, 546
Waller, B., 225
Walls, R. T., 510
Walsh, B., 187
Walsh, M. E., 331
Walsh, W. B., 29, 285, 490
Walsh-Blair, L. Y., 261, 329,
331, 332, 336
Walton, K. E., 300
Wan, C. M., 577
Wan, T., 667
Wanberg, C. R., 311, 313, 509,
547, 596, 597, 605, 606,
609, 610, 611–612
Wang, M., 96
Wang, N., 311, 312
Wang, Q., 411, 626
Ward, C. C., 67
Ward, C. M., 498
Warr, P., 627
Wartman, K. L., 334
Waters, E. B., 656
Watkins, D., 311
Watkins, M., 457
Watson, D., 302–303, 313, 582,
627, 633
Watson, M., 510, 541
Watts, A. G., 543
Watts, R., 261
Wayne, J. H., 201
Wehman, P., 363, 376
Wehmeyer, M., 371
Wehmeyer, M. K., 371

Wehmeyer, M. L., 370, 371
Weiss, D. J., 39, 40, 41, 422, 425,
434, 625
Weiss, L., 457
Welsh, A. C., 281
Welsh, J. R., 469
Wentzel, K. R., 335
West, S., 459
Westbrook, B. W., 223
Western, M., 599, 600
Wettersten, K., 375
Wettersten, K. B., 261, 267,
550
Wettersten, V. B., 344
Wewiorski, N., 359
Wewiorski, N. J., 367
Whalley, L., 456
Whimper, L. A., 339
Whiston, S., 667, 668
Whiston, S. C., 18, 321, 332, 333,
334, 542, 565, 566, 567,
568, 570, 571–572, 573,
575–576, 577, 584, 586
Whitaker, L. A., 569
Whitcomb, D. H., 289
White, G. B., 190
White, M. J., 190
Whitﬁeld, E., 467
Whiting, S. W., 639
Whitney, D. R., 61, 62, 65
Whitson, M. L., 230
Wiium, N., 335
Wilhelmsen, B. U., 335
Wilkie, L., 603
Williams, C., 95, 457
Williams, C. M., 65, 131, 132
Williams, H., 200
Williams, W., 275, 283, 456
Williams, W. M., 194, 410
Williamson, E. G., 168, 508
Willis, L., 603
Willis, S., 369
Willness, C. R., 199, 200
Wilson, M. A., 555
Wilson, V., 456
Wilson, W. J., 256
Winter, D., 395
Wise, L., 469
Wise, L. L., 395
Wishart, P., 614

Withrow, R. L., 45, 46
Wittenburg, D., 358
Woitke, M. B., 232, 494
Wold, B., 335
Wolter, K., 469
Wolters, C. A., 552
Wong, S. C., 73
Wood, C., 467
Wood, R., 668
Wood, W. M., 370
Worth, S., 551
Worthington, R. L., 228, 246,
276
Wright, C., 369
Wright, S. L., 332
Wrosch, C., 162
Wynne, D. C., 223
Xu, Y. J., 359
Yakushko, O., 261
Yang, B., 555
Yang, W., 67
Yang, Y., 363
Yau, K. K. W., 595
Yin, W. O., 581
Yoon, M., 66
Young, A. M., 431
Young, G., 60
Young, R. A., 202, 218, 237, 251,
260
Youniss, J., 547
Yuen, M., 311
Zacharatos, A., 627
Zahidi, S., 187, 188
Zalapa, J., 225, 230
Zedeck, S., 40
Zeedyk, M. S., 550
Zhan, Y., 96
Zhu, J., 611–612
Zikic, J., 97, 307, 509, 608, 610,
611, 612, 613
Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., 338,
550
Zimmerman, B. J., 552
Zimmerman, R. D., 431
Zytowski, D., 438, 439
Zytowski, D. G., 21, 40, 85, 86,
484

Subject Index
Ability and aptitude:
adult assessments of, 466–469
assessment of, 22, 49, 137–138, 401–404, 449–471,
661, 672, 674
career counseling application of ability and
aptitude assessments, 470–471
children and adolescents developing work
readiness, 546–548
college school student assessments of, 464–466
computer-related, 655
continued education and training improving, 646,
654, 674, 675
cultural differences in, 457–458
deﬁnition of, 451–452
developmentally appropriate assessments of,
460–469
gender differences in, 456–457
genetic factors inﬂuencing, 450
high school student assessments of, 461–464
historical milestones in assessment of, 449–451
interests inﬂuenced by, 391–392, 395–396, 397, 460
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 32–34,
37, 38, 44–45, 46–47, 48, 49, 452
problem-solving, 579
protean careers requiring different, 469–470
resumes summarizing, 602–603
self-concept of or self-estimated, 89, 458–460, 471
(see also Self-efﬁcacy beliefs)
self-regulation skills as, 139–140, 552, 609
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 117, 121,
126–128, 642–643
stability of, 455–456
structure of abilities, 453–455
work satisfaction and performance inﬂuenced by,
467, 471, 547, 640–641, 642–643, 646
Ability Explorer, 459
Ability Proﬁler, 451, 452, 467–468
ACCUPLACER, 464
ACT achievement test, 463, 514
ACT Interest Inventory, Unisex Edition of, 57, 400,
410, 514, 515
ACT WorkKeys, 674
ACT World-of-Work Map, 514–516
Additional constructs:
assessment of, 477–499
career counseling practice implications of, 496–499
career decision-making difﬁculties as, 493–496
career maturity and career adaptability as,
478–482, 496, 499
goals as, 486–487
life role salience as, 487–488
outcome expectations as, 485–486, 497
overview of, 477–478
personality factors as, 489–493, 497
self-efﬁcacy beliefs as, 483–485, 495–496, 497

social supports and relational inﬂuences as,
488–489
vocational identity as, 481, 482–483, 496–497
Adolescents. See Children and adolescents
Adult Career Concerns Inventory, 102–103, 104–105
Advertisements, job, 597–599
Advisory Committee on Education, 507, 517
Advocacy Competencies, 289
Age:
career counseling effectiveness inﬂuenced by,
576–577
continuity theory of aging, 666–667
developmentally appropriate ability assessments
based on, 460–469
job searches impacted by, 610
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 132
Agreeableness, 303, 320, 489–491, 607, 640
American Community Survey, 359
American Counseling Association, 289
American Psychological Association, 19
American School Counselor Association, 339, 509,
527
Americans with Disabilities Act, 360, 362, 365–366,
375
Annie E. Casey Foundation, 265
Apprenticeships, job searches via, 601
ARC Self-Determination Scale, 370
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, 57,
451, 468–469
Assessments:
of ability and aptitude, 22, 49, 137–138, 401–404,
449–471, 661, 672, 674
of additional constructs, 477–499
administration of, 407–408, 462, 463, 464, 465, 467,
468, 469
of career adaptability or maturity, 162, 478–482,
496, 499
of Career Construction Theory and Practice
constructs, 168, 173, 389
career counseling application of, 405–413,
434–441, 470–471, 496–499, 581, 582–583, 586
of career decision-making difﬁculties, 493–496,
497–498, 581, 582–583
of career-development assessment and counseling
(C-DAC) model, 104–106, 388, 439–440
cultural differences in, 410–411, 433–434, 457–458,
498
developmentally appropriate, 460–469
of differential status identity, 255
gender differences in, 409–410, 433, 441, 456–457
of goals, 486–487
of Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment personality types, 57, 66, 70, 73,
74, 388, 390, 391, 395, 396–398, 490
of interests, 22, 38–39, 57, 66, 106, 137–138,
387–413, 468

695

696

Subject Index

Assessments (Continued)
interpretation of, 408–409, 411–412, 435–436,
437–438, 439–440, 460, 467–468, 469, 484–485
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals, 285–286
of life role salience, 487–488
of Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers
constructs, 85–86, 96–97, 99, 102–103,
104–106, 422, 426–427, 428–430
of Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment
constructs, 38–41, 49, 388, 418, 421–422,
424–426, 428–430, 434–436, 452
of needs and values, 39–40, 49, 85–86, 137,
417–441, 468
occupational information in (see Occupational
information resources)
of outcome expectations, 485–486, 497
of personality factors, 57, 66, 70, 73, 74, 304–306,
316, 489–493, 497
preparation for, 407
reasons for/importance of, 17–18, 394
responsible use of, 409–411
selection of assessment tools for, 407
of self-determination, 370
of self-efﬁcacy beliefs, 483–485, 495–496, 497
of Social Cognitive Career Theory constructs,
137–138, 389, 483–487, 488, 497
of social support and relational inﬂuences, 488–489
of socioeconomic factor impacts, 255, 261, 458
tools used for (see Assessment tools)
of vocational identity, 481, 482–483, 496–497
of work satisfaction and performance, 40–41,
625–626, 630–633, 634, 643–646
Assessment tools:
Ability and Aptitude card sorts, 459
Ability Explorer, 459
Ability Proﬁler, 451, 452, 467–468
ACCUPLACER, 464
ACT achievement test, 463, 514
ACT Interest Inventory, Unisex Edition of, 57, 400,
410, 514, 515
ACT WorkKeys, 674
Adult Career Concerns Inventory, 102–103,
104–105
ARC Self-Determination Scale, 370
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, 57,
451, 468–469
Binet-Simon Scale, 450
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey, 396–397,
401–404, 407, 459, 465, 484
Career Ability Placement Survey (CAPS), 468
Career Adapt-Abilities Scale, 162, 481
Career and Personality Assessments systems, 484
Career Barriers Inventory or -Revised, 495
Career Conﬁdence Inventory, 484
Career Construction Interview, 168, 173
Career Decision Difﬁculties Questionnaire, 493
Career Decision-Making Difﬁculties
Questionnaire, 581
Career Decision Self-Efﬁcacy Scale, 483
Career Development Inventory, 96–97, 102, 105,
479, 480
Career Futures Inventory-Revised, 480, 482, 489
Career Indecision Proﬁle, 494
Career Maturity Inventory, 96, 97, 479, 480–481
Career Maturity Inventory-Adaptability Form, 162
Career Occupational Preference System (COPS),
468

Career Orientation Placement and Evaluation
Survey (COPES), 468
COMPASS, 464
Differential Status Identity Scale, 255
DISCOVER, 514, 516
Emotional and Personality Career Difﬁculties
Scale, 582
Emotional and Personality Related Career
Decision-Making Difﬁculties Questionnaire,
493
Expanded Skills Conﬁdence Inventory, 483–484
EXPLORE test, 462, 514
General Aptitude Test Battery, 22, 451
Graduate Record Exam (GRE), 465–466
Identity Scale of My Vocational Situation, 63
Index of Job Satisfaction, 625
Inventory of Work Relevant Abilities, 459
Job Descriptive Index, 41, 625
Job in General Scale, 625
Kuder Skills Assessment, 484
Middle School Self-Efﬁcacy Scale, 484
Minnesota Ability Estimates Questionnaire,
403–404
Minnesota Importance Questionnaire, 39, 49, 419,
422, 424–426, 434–436, 440
Minnesota Mechanical Ability Tests, 451
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire, 40, 625, 632
Minnesota Satisfactoriness Scales, 41, 634
Missouri Occupational Card Sort, 73
Motivated Skills Card Sort-Revised, 459
Myers-briggs type indicator-3rd edition, 489, 491
My Vocational Situation, 63, 482–483, 493
NEO-Five Factor Inventory, 316, 490
NEO Personality Inventory-Revised, 490–491
O*NET ability proﬁler, 451, 452, 467–468, 524
O*NET interest proﬁler, 514, 522
O*NET value measures, 39, 49, 418, 425, 434–435,
436–438, 441
Perceptions of Barriers Scale, 495–496
Personal Styles Scale, 489, 492–493
PLAN test, 462–463, 514
Position Classiﬁcation Inventory, 57, 74
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, 632
Salience Inventory, 99, 103, 104, 105, 488
SAT aptitude test, 463–464
Self Directed Search, 57, 70, 396–398, 407, 459,
513–514
Skills Conﬁdence Inventory, 397, 483, 514
Social Support Behaviors measure, 488–489
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 450
Strong Interest Inventory, 22, 57, 66, 106, 396–397,
398–401, 402–403, 407, 410, 489, 492–493, 514
Student Strengths Inventory, 523
Study of Values, 419, 421
Super’s Work Values Inventory-Revised, 438–439
Support scale, 489
Values card sorts, 40, 523
Values Scale, 86, 103, 105, 106, 438–440
Value Survey, 421
Vocational Identity Scale, 481, 482–483
Vocational Preference Inventory, 57
Work Hope Scale, 261
Work Importance Locator, 425, 437–438, 516
Work Importance Proﬁler, 39, 49, 425, 436–437,
440, 516
Work Importance Study, 102, 103, 426–427
Working Conditions Value Scale, 426
Work Values Inventory, 40, 86, 422, 438–439

Subject Index

Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and
Transgender Issues in Counseling, 288–289
Association of Computer-Based Systems for Career
Information, 526
Attachment theory, on relational inﬂuences,
332–333, 334
Bandura, Albert, 117–119, 480
Binet, Alfred, 450
Binet-Simon Scale, 450
Brown, Steven, 582, 588
Bullying. See Violence or bullying, relational
inﬂuences of
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey:
ability and aptitude assessment via, 459, 465
interest assessment via, 396–397, 401–404, 407
self-efﬁcacy assessment via, 484
Card sorts:
ability and aptitude, 459
occupational, 73
values, 40, 523
Career Ability Placement Survey (CAPS), 468
Career academies, 340
Career Adapt-Abilities Scale, 162, 481
Career adaptability:
assessment of, 162, 478–482, 496, 499
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
156–163, 176, 179
career transitions necessitating, 661–662, 672, 677
disabilities impacting, 372, 374–375
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 86, 97,
102, 103
Career and Personality Assessments systems, 484
Career awareness, promotion of, 11, 75–76, 134–136,
539–557
Career Barriers Inventory or -Revised, 495
Career choices:
barriers to, 124–126, 138–139, 191–192, 589
cultural inﬂuences on, 125, 126, 139
decision-making difﬁculties impacting (see Career
decision-making difﬁculties)
deﬁnition of, 8–9, 565–566
disability-related issues impacting, 363, 367–373
effectiveness of career choice interventions,
566–580
expanding, 137–138
factors impacting, 7, 124–126, 138–139, 191–198,
217–218, 226–234, 259–263, 306–315, 333,
363, 367–373, 431, 589
gender-related issues in, 191–198
goal setting for, 139–140
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 70–73, 75
job ﬁnding and implementation of, 11, 75, 136–142,
261–263, 265–266, 312–315, 595–616
needs and values inﬂuencing, 431
occupational information resources assisting with,
529
personality factors impacting, 306–315
promotion of, 565–589
race and ethnic issues impacting, 217–218, 226–234
relational inﬂuences on, 333
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 115, 123–126,
136–142
socioeconomic factors impacting, 259–263, 589
Career Conﬁdence Inventory, 484
Career Construction Interview, 168, 173

697

Career Construction Theory and Practice, 147–180
action phase of, 172, 178, 180
assessment in, 168, 173, 389
on boundaryless, protean careers, 150
on career adaptability, 156–163, 176, 179
career interventions under, 166–168, 168–179,
179–180
case example applying, 172–179
coconstruction phase of, 171–172, 177, 180
construction phase of, 169, 173, 179
counseling model of, 168–179
deconstruction phase of, 169–171, 179
diverse populations under, 204–205, 223–224,
249–251
foundations of, 151–168
on goals and interests, 162–163, 169, 171, 389
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment inﬂuencing, 153–155, 175
on identity narratives, 163–165, 170, 179, 205,
223–224
on introjecting guides and incorporating models,
151–152
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers
inﬂuencing, 100, 106, 149, 150
overview of, 147, 179–180
on personality, 153–155, 175
practice implications, 179–180
reconstruction phase of, 170–171, 173–176, 180
on reputation, 152–153, 154
self as actor in, 149, 151–155, 166–168
self as agent in, 149, 155–163, 166–168
self as author in, 149, 163–166, 166–168
self-making in, 148–150, 154–155
Social Cognitive Career Theory comparison to,
116–117
social constructionism inﬂuencing, 148–149
Career counseling, promotion and interventions:
assessment application in, 405–413, 434–441,
470–471, 496–499, 581, 582–583, 586 (see also
Assessments)
career awareness, development and school success
promotion, 11, 75–76, 134–136, 539–557
career choices promotion, 565–589
Career Construction Theory and Practice
applications to, 166–168, 168–179, 179–180
career decision-making difﬁculties impacting,
580–584, 588
career-development assessment and counseling
(C-DAC) model interventions, 105–106, 388,
439–440
career service options vs., 13–15, 166–168
career transition counseling, 12, 653–678
client-counselor working alliance in, 574–575
client factors impacting, 576–580, 584–585 (see also
Demographics and diversity of workforce)
client preferences inﬂuencing, 568–569
computers vs., 18
cost-beneﬁt analysis of, 586
critical ingredients for, 570–574, 584
culturally competent, 234–237, 577–579
deﬁnition and distinctiveness of, 10–16, 167–168
disability-related practice implications for,
373–377
dose effect in, 569–570
effects of, 18–19
environmental supports in, 573
ethical issues in, 525–527
factors impacting effectiveness of, 568–580,
587–588

698

Subject Index

Career counseling, promotion and interventions
(Continued)
format and foci of, 11–13 (see also modalities of)
gender issues practice implications for, 205–208,
209, 568–569, 577
history and future of, 21–23
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment applications to, 69–76, 76–77
individualized interpretations and feedback in,
571–572
Integrative Contextual Model of Career
Development as, 542–554
job ﬁnding aid and choice implementation
interventions, 11, 75, 136–142, 261–263,
265–266, 312–315, 595–616
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individual
practice implications for, 288–291
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers
applications to, 104–106, 106–107
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment
applications to, 43–49, 49–50
modalities of, 11–13, 575–576, 585, 674–675
modeling in, 572 (see also Role models)
myths and realities about, 16–19
occupational information applications for,
527–531, 572
personal counseling and psychotherapy vs., 15–16,
16–17, 18–19
personality factor practice implications for,
315–323
practice, scholarship and social justice roles for,
23–25, 349–350, 589
problem-solving appraisal skills impacting, 579
professionals performing, 19–20
race and ethnicity issues practice implications,
234–238, 577–579, 585
relational inﬂuences practice implications for,
339–341, 346–350
research on, 23–24, 584–587, 667–671
Social Cognitive Career Theory applications to,
134–142, 142–144
socioeconomic factors practice implications for,
264–268, 584–585
theories inﬂuencing (see Career development
theories)
treatment manuals for, 585–586
workbook/written exercises in, 571
work satisfaction and performance promotions, 12,
73–75, 140–142, 621–647
Career Cruising, 524–525, 529
Career Decision Difﬁculties Questionnaire, 493
Career decision-making difﬁculties:
assessment of, 493–496, 497–498, 581, 582–583
barriers creating, 494–496
career choice interventions impacted by, 580–584,
588
children and adolescents overcoming through
readiness, 549–550
sources of indecision creating, 493–494, 581–583
taxonomy of, 581
Career Decision-Making Difﬁculties Questionnaire,
581
Career Decision Self-Efﬁcacy Scale, 483
Career development, choice and adjustment:
assessments in (see Assessments)
basics of (see Career development basics)
career counseling in (see Career counseling,
promotion and interventions)
demographics and diversity in (see Demographics
and diversity of workforce)

theories of (see Career development theories)
Career-development assessment and counseling
(C-DAC) model, 104–106, 388, 439–440
Career development basics:
career and career development deﬁnitions, 8–10
career counseling deﬁnition and distinctiveness,
10–16, 167–168
career counseling myths and realities, 16–19
career counseling professionals, 19–20
history and future, 21–23
life role intersection with work, 5–6, 98–99, 107,
342–343, 622
overview of, 1–2
practice, scholarship and social justice, 23–25,
349–350, 589
reasons people work, 2–7, 375–376
Career Development Inventory, 96–97, 102, 105, 479,
480
Career Development Quarterly, 19, 102
Career development theories:
Career Construction Theory and Practice, 100, 106,
116–117, 147–180, 204–205, 223–224,
249–251, 389
career-development assessment and counseling,
104–106, 388, 439–440
development theories, 251, 329–330, 540, 666–667
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise, 204, 222–223, 249–251, 281,
372–373, 388–389, 540, 548–549
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment, 55–77, 87–88, 116–117,
153–155, 175, 203–204, 218–220, 248–249,
277–278, 308, 388, 390, 391, 395, 396–398, 490,
513–514, 628, 642, 664
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers, 83–107,
116–117, 149, 150, 204, 223, 249–251,
280–281, 329, 346, 371–372, 422, 426–427,
428–430, 540, 622, 665
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment, 29–50,
202–203, 220–222, 248–249, 279–280, 368,
388, 418, 421–422, 424–426, 428–430,
434–436, 452, 621–622, 628, 642, 664
Social Cognitive Career Theory, 115–144, 205,
224–225, 251–252, 282–285, 329, 346–347,
368–370, 389, 483–487, 488, 497, 628–629,
642–643, 665–666, 673
social learning theory, 251–252, 282–285
Career education. See also Schools and education
career academies for, 340
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
167–168
continuing education and training improving
work skills, 646, 654, 674, 675
deﬁnition of, 13–14
occupational information resources available for
(see Occupational information resources)
Career Futures Inventory-Revised, 480, 482, 489
Career Indecision Proﬁle, 494
Career Institute, The, 340
Career maturity. See also Career adaptability
assessment of, 162, 478–482, 496, 499
disabilities impacting, 372, 374–375
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 86,
96–97, 102, 103
Career Maturity Inventory, 96, 97, 479, 480–481
Career Maturity Inventory-Adaptability Form, 162
Career Occupational Preference System (COPS), 468
Career Onestop, 519
Career Orientation Placement and Evaluation
Survey (COPES), 468

Subject Index

Career Pattern Study, 86, 97, 101–102, 438
Career Planning Survey, 514
Career transitions:
ability and aptitude assessments facilitating, 466,
661, 672, 674
career adaptability during, 661–662, 672, 677
career development theories on, 44–45, 70–73,
91–98, 663–667, 673
career direction shifts necessitating, 657, 669–670
common issues across, 660–663
counseling on, 12, 653–678
educational level impacting, 654–655, 656–657, 674
ﬁnancial uncertainty due to/during, 655, 657, 658,
659, 660, 662
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 70–73, 664
homemakers making, 658, 661
increasing prevalence of, 653–655
job loss necessitating, 660, 670
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 91–98,
665
mental health relationship to, 655, 658–659, 660,
662–663, 664, 669, 674, 677
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 44–45,
664
overview of, 653, 675–678
practice implications for, 671–675
relational inﬂuences on, 670, 674
research perspectives on, 667–671
school-to-school or school-to-work transitioning,
550–551, 656–657, 669
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 665–666, 673
types of adult, 655–660
unemployed adults entering workforce in,
658–660, 661, 670–671
veterans making, 21, 363, 517, 658–659, 661, 662,
670
welfare to work, 659, 671
Career Trek, 522
Cattell-Horn-Carroll model of intelligence, 454–455
Center for Labor Market Studies, 256
Children and adolescents:
ability and aptitude assessments for, 450, 455–456,
457–458, 461–464, 467–468
career adaptability or maturity of, 86, 96–97, 102,
103, 372, 374–375, 478–482, 496, 499
career awareness, development and school success
promotion among, 11, 75–76, 134–136,
539–557
Career Construction Theory and Practice actor and
agent roles of, 149, 151–163, 166–168
career decision-making readiness of, 549–550
with disabilities (see Disabilities, youth and young
adults with)
early development and occupational stereotyping
in, 189–191, 510, 540, 541, 548–549
family inﬂuences on (see Family)
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on career development process
of, 222–223, 250–251, 281, 372–373
Integrative Contextual Model of Career
Development for, 542–554
interest crystallization by, 551–552
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on career
development stages of, 86, 93–94, 96–97, 102,
103
mentor inﬂuences on, 338, 340
needs and values development in, 432
occupational information resources for, 507–531
outcome expectations and motivations of, 552–553

699

peer inﬂuences on, 331, 337–338
relational inﬂuences on, 331–341
schools and education for (see Schools and
education)
school-to-school or school-to-work transitioning
for, 550–551, 656–657, 669
self-efﬁcacy belief development in, 543–545
self-regulated learning by, 552
teacher inﬂuences on, 331, 335–337, 339–340
violence inﬂuencing, 338–339
vocational identity formation in, 545–546
work readiness skill development in, 546–548
work world and personal role in work world
understanding by, 548–551
Choices Program, The, 341
Classism, 255–258
Coaching, 14, 167
Cognitive ability. See Ability and aptitude
COMPASS, 464
Computers:
assessment administration via, 407, 425, 464–465
competency in using impacting career
opportunities, 655
computer-assisted career guidance systems, 106,
522–525, 527–530, 575–576
counselors vs., 18
e-mentoring via, 541
job searches via, 597–599
online occupational information databases via, 39,
49, 50, 59, 71, 175, 418, 425, 434–435, 436–438,
441, 451, 452, 467–468, 513, 514, 516, 518–522,
524
Congruence:
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 59–60, 67–68, 71–72, 74–75,
76–77, 220, 395
of interests and work satisfaction, 394–396
of needs, values and work satisfaction, 431, 435, 441
Conscientiousness, 303–304, 318–319, 322, 489–491,
640, 643
Consistency, Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice
and Adjustment on, 61–63, 68, 73, 77, 220
Continuity theory of aging, 666–667
Cost-beneﬁt analysis, of career counseling
interventions, 586
Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Educational Programs, 19
Cultural inﬂuences. See also Demographics and
diversity of workforce
on ability and aptitude, 457–458
on assessments, 410–411, 433–434, 457–458, 498
on career choices, 125, 126, 139
on culturally competent career counseling,
234–237, 577–579
on interests, 410–411
on job searches, 601, 604–605, 615
on needs and values, 226–227, 433–434
on relationships, 330, 339, 347
on work motivations, 3
Decision-making difﬁculties. See Career
decision-making difﬁculties
Demographics and diversity of workforce:
age status, 132, 460–469, 576–577, 610, 666–667
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
204–205, 223–224, 249–251
children and adolescents (see Children and
adolescents)
gender differences and equity (see Gender
differences and equity)

700

Subject Index

Demographics and diversity of workforce
(Continued)
genetic factors, 122, 300, 389–390, 450
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 204, 222–223, 249–251, 281,
372–373, 548–549
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 66, 67, 75–76, 203–204,
218–220, 248–249, 277–278
job searches impacted by, 610–611
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individuals,
42, 46, 133, 203, 275–291, 345
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 86,
93–94, 96–97, 102, 103, 204, 223, 249–251,
280–281, 329, 371–372
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 35,
42–43, 45–47, 50, 202–203, 220–222, 248–249,
279–280, 368
personality factors (see Personality factors)
race and ethnicity (see Race and ethnicity)
relational inﬂuences, 138–139, 289–290, 329–350,
488–489, 574–575, 597, 599–600, 609–610,
670, 674
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 115–116,
122–123, 125–126, 128–129, 130, 131–133,
134–136, 205, 224–225, 251–252, 282–285,
329, 368–370
social learning theories on, 251–252, 282–285
socioeconomic factors (see Socioeconomic factors)
youth and young adults with disabilities, 42, 43,
46, 122, 132, 133, 357–377
Developmental psychology:
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment inﬂuenced by, 87–88
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers inﬂuenced
by, 86–88, 101, 103, 107, 204
vocational psychology overlap with, 20
Development theories. See also Career development
theories
continuity theory of aging, 666–667
developmental contextual metatheory, 329–330
Developmental Theory of Occupational Choice,
540
ecological human development theory, 251
selection, optimization, and compensation (SOC)
model of adult development, 666
Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes (DHOC),
57, 63, 71, 74, 397, 514
Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 516, 517, 518
Differential psychology, 84–86, 101
Differential status identity, 255
Differential Status Identity Scale, 255
Differentiation, Holland’s Theory of Vocational
Choice and Adjustment on, 60–61, 68, 71,
72–73, 75, 77, 220
Disabilities, youth and young adults with:
barriers to work for, 361–363
career development of, 357–377
career development theories on, 42, 43, 46, 122,
132, 133, 367–373
deﬁnition of disabilities, 359–361, 365
disability beneﬁts and health insurance for, 357,
361, 362, 366, 376
employer attitudes and discrimination impacting,
362
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 372–373
legislation impacting, 360, 362, 363–367, 375
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on,
371–372

Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 42, 43,
46, 368
overview of, 357–358
practice implications for, 373–377
reasonable accommodations for, 365–366, 375
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 122, 132, 133,
368–370
special education for, 358, 360, 362–363, 364–365
DISCOVER, 514, 516
Diversity of workforce. See Demographics and
diversity of workforce
Domestic violence, relational inﬂuences of, 338–339,
343–344
Dose effect, 569–570
Education. See Career education; Schools and
education
Educational and Industrial Testing Service (EdITS),
468
Educational Opportunities Finder, 57, 71, 397–398
Education of All Handicapped Children Act (1976),
364
Emotional and Personality Career Difﬁculties Scale,
582
Emotional and Personality Related Career
Decision-Making Difﬁculties Questionnaire,
493
Encore careers, 96
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC), 200
Ethical issues, in occupational information use,
525–527
Expanded Skills Conﬁdence Inventory, 483–484
EXPLORE test, 462, 514
Extraversion, 300, 302–303, 319–320, 489–491, 640
Family. See also Life roles
career counseling effectiveness inﬂuenced by, 573
domestic violence in, 338–339, 343–344
job search support via, 597, 599–600, 609–610
parenting roles and gender in, 195, 196–198,
201–202
relational inﬂuences of, 331, 332–335, 336–337
school success inﬂuenced by, 555
work readiness skills learned in, 547
Family systems theory, 334
Financial issues. See Socioeconomic factors; Wages
Five C’s (collaboration, competence, context, critical
consciousness, and community), 207
Freud, Sigmund, 2
Friends and family. See Family; Peers
Galton, Francis, 450
Gati, Itamar, 581, 588
Gays. See Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals
Gender differences and equity:
in ability and aptitude, 456–457
assessments inﬂuenced by, 409–410, 433, 441,
456–457
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
204–205
career counseling effectiveness inﬂuenced by, 577
career development impacted by, 187–209
career development theories on, 42, 66, 67, 103,
122–123, 130, 132–133, 202–205, 548–549
in domestic violence, 343–344
early development and occupational stereotyping
based on, 189–191, 510, 540, 541, 548–549

Subject Index

gender-based harassment, 199–200
gender-based role models, 135, 193, 195, 198
gender mainstreaming, 207–208
gender-related workforce experiences, 198–202
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 66, 67
in interests, 409–410
job choice and entry impacted by, 191–198
job satisfaction and, 200–201
job searches impacted by, 611
life roles impacted by, 195, 196–198, 201–202,
342–343
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 103,
204
men-speciﬁc issues, 195–196
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 42,
202–203
in needs and values, 433, 441
overview of, 187–189, 208–209
parenting roles and, 195, 196–198, 201–202
practice implications, 205–208, 209, 568–569, 577
research on, 190, 192–195, 196, 197, 199–201
in self-efﬁcacy beliefs, 130, 132–133, 194, 196, 205,
540
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 122–123, 130,
132–133, 205
in STEM careers, 187, 191, 192–195, 205, 465, 510,
548
stereotypes based on, 189–191, 192–193, 203–204,
206, 510, 548–549
in wages, 187, 197–198, 199
in work-family interface, 342–343
Gender identity, 276. See also Transgenderism
General Aptitude Test Battery, 22, 451
Genetic factors:
ability and aptitude inﬂuenced by, 450
interests inﬂuenced by, 389–390
personality impacted by, 300
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 122
Global Women’s Conference, 187–188
Goals. See Personal goals
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise:
on career awareness, 540
on gender issues, 204, 548–549
on interests, 388–389
on LGBT issues, 281
on race and ethnicity issues, 222–223
on socioeconomic factors, 249–251
on youth or young adults with disabilities, 372–373
Graduate Record Exam (GRE), 465–466
Great Depression, 21–22, 405
Guidance, 13, 166–168
‘‘Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Lesbian,
Gay and Bisexual Clients,’’ 288
Heredity. See Genetic factors
Hippocrates, 449
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment, 55–77
applications of, 69–76
assessments under, 57, 66, 70, 73, 74, 388, 390, 391,
395, 396–398, 490
on career choices, 70–73, 75
Career Construction Theory and Practice
inﬂuenced by, 153–155, 175
on career transitions, 70–73, 664
on congruence, 59–60, 67–68, 71–72, 74–75, 76–77,
220, 395
on consistency, 61–63, 68, 73, 77, 220

701

contributions of, 69–70
developmental psychology inﬂuencing, 87–88
on differentiation, 60–61, 68, 71, 72–73, 75, 77, 220
diverse populations under, 66, 67, 75–76, 203–204,
218–220, 248–249, 277–278
history of, 55
on identity, 63–64, 68–69, 75, 77
on interests, 56–57, 66, 203–204, 308, 388, 390, 391,
395, 396–398
occupational classiﬁcation systems based on,
513–514 (see also Dictionary of Holland
Occupational Codes)
‘‘other things being equal’’ qualiﬁer in, 59, 72
overview of, 56–64, 76–77
personality and environment types under, 56–59,
153–155, 175, 219–220, 248–249, 277–278,
308, 388, 390, 391, 395, 396–398, 490, 513–514,
628, 642
practice implications of, 69–76, 76–77
predictions based on relationship among types
under, 59–64, 67–69
research support for, 64–69
Social Cognitive Career Theory comparison to,
116–117
on work satisfaction and performance, 68, 73–75,
220, 628, 642
Homosexuals. See Lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender individuals
Human Rights Campaign, 290
Identity:
Career Construction Theory and Practice identity
narratives, 163–165, 170, 179, 205, 223–224
differential status, 255
ethnic, 229–230, 236 (see also Race and ethnicity)
gender, 276 (see also Gender differences and equity;
Transgenderism)
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 63–64, 68–69, 75, 77
sexual, 276, 280–282, 283–291 (see also Lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender individuals)
vocational, 309, 481, 482–483, 496–497, 545–546
work deﬁning, 3–4, 361
Identity Scale of My Vocational Situation, 63
Income. See Socioeconomic factors; Wages
Indeed (online job listing site), 525
Index of Job Satisfaction, 625
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 364–365
Individuals with Disabilities Education
Improvement Act (IDEIA), 360, 364–365
Industrial/organizational (I/O) psychology, 20, 418
Information, occupational. See Occupational
information resources
Integrative Contextual Model of Career
Development:
introduction, 542–543
motivations and motivational approaches, 552–553
research, 553–554
tasks, 543–552
Intelligence. See Ability and aptitude
Interests:
ability and aptitude inﬂuencing, 391–392, 395–396,
397, 460
assessment of, 22, 38–39, 57, 66, 106, 137–138,
387–413, 468
Campbell Interest and Skill Survey assessing,
396–397, 401–404, 407
Career Construction Theory and Practice on, 163,
169, 171, 389

702

Subject Index

Interests (Continued)
career counseling application of interest
assessments, 405–409
career-development assessment and counseling
(C-DAC) model on, 388
career development theories on, 38–39, 56–57, 66,
115, 117, 120–123, 124–126, 130, 134–136,
137–138, 143, 163, 169, 171, 203–204, 308,
387–389, 390, 391, 395, 396–398
children and adolescents crystallizing, 551–552
cultural inﬂuences on, 410–411
gender differences in, 409–410
genetic factors or nature inﬂuencing, 389–390
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 388–389
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 56–57, 66, 203–204, 308, 388,
390, 391, 395, 396–398
methods of assessing, 396
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 38–39,
388
needs and values relationship to, 423–424, 551–552
overview of, 387
personality factors inﬂuencing, 56–57, 66, 203–204,
307–308, 388, 390, 391, 392, 395, 396–398
reasons to assess, 394
relational inﬂuences on, 329
self-concept of, 89, 389
Self Directed Search assessing, 396–398, 407
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 115, 117,
120–123, 124–126, 130, 134–136, 137–138,
143, 389
stability of, 392–393
Strong Interest Inventory assessing, 22, 57, 66, 106,
396–397, 398–401, 402–403, 407, 410
work satisfaction and performance congruence
with, 394–396
International Association for Educational and
Vocation Guidance, 24
International Association of Applied Psychology, 24
International Standard Classiﬁcation of Occupations
system, 513
Internet-based activities. See Computers
Internships, job searches via, 600–601
Interventions. See Career counseling, promotion and
interventions
Interviews, job, 603–605
intoCareers, 522–523, 528, 530
Inventory of Work Relevant Abilities, 459
Job Club (group intervention), 613, 614
Job Descriptive Index, 41, 625
Job in General Scale, 625
JOBS (group intervention), 613–614
Jobs, deﬁnition of, 8. See also Work; career-related
entries
Job satisfaction and performance. See Work
satisfaction and performance
Job searches:
apprenticeship role in, 601
career interventions for job ﬁnding aid and choice
implementation, 11, 75, 136–142, 261–263,
265–266, 312–315, 595–616
cultural challenges in, 601, 604–605, 610–611, 615
demographic factors impacting, 610–611
expectancies and self-evaluations inﬂuencing,
608–609
factors inﬂuencing, 607–611

internship role in, 600–601
job advertisements used in, 597–599
Job Club program addressing, 613, 614
job interviews during, 603–605
JOBS program addressing, 613–614
methods employed for, 596–601
motivations and intentions for, 609
networking used in, 597, 599–600
overview of, 595–596, 614–616
personality inﬂuencing, 607–608
persuasion methods in, 601–605
practice implications for interventions related to,
614–616
predictors of behaviors and outcomes for, 605–613
progress and strategies in, 611–613
relational inﬂuences on, 597, 599–600, 609–610
resumes created for, 602–603
volunteer position role in, 601
Jobs for the Future, 669
Job Training Partnership Act (1982), 546
Journal of Career Assessment, 19, 285
Journal of Career Development, 19, 235
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 19
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 19
Journals, professional, 19, 102, 235, 285
Jung, Carl, 491
Kierkegaard, Søren, 5
Kuder Career Planning System, 438
Kuder Skills Assessment, 484
Labor economics, 20
Leisure Activities Finder, The, 73
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
individuals:
assessments of, 285–286
career development of, 275–291
career development theories applied to, 42, 46, 133,
203, 277–285
discrimination and heterosexism against, 278–279,
281, 283–286, 289–290, 345
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 281
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 277–278
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on,
280–281
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 42, 46,
203, 279–280
overview of, 275–277, 288–291
practice implications for, 288–291
relational inﬂuences on, 284–285, 289–290, 345
sexual identity issues of, 276, 280–282, 283–291
sexual orientation of, 276
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 133, 282–285
social learning theories on, 282–285
stereotypes of, 285, 288, 289
transgenderism speciﬁcally, 275, 276, 286–288
Life roles. See also Demographics and diversity of
workforce
assessment of life role salience, 99, 103, 104, 105,
487–488
gender-based issues impacting, 195, 196–198,
201–202, 342–343
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on life
satisfaction, 44
personality relationship to, 300–301
self-concept based on (see Self-concept theory)

Subject Index

work intersection with, 5–6, 98–99, 107, 342–343,
622
work-life balance issues, 12–13, 98, 201–202
work vs. life values for, 422–423, 439–440
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers, 83–107
applications of, 104–106
assessments in, 85–86, 96–97, 99, 102–103,
104–106, 422, 426–427, 428–430
background of, 84–91
on career awareness, 540
Career Construction Theory and Practice
inﬂuenced by, 100, 106, 149, 150
career-development assessment and counseling
(C-DAC) model based on, 104–106
career maturity or adaptability concepts in, 86,
96–97, 102, 103
on career transitions, 91–98, 665
core principles of, 91–101
development psychology inﬂuencing, 86–88, 101,
103, 107, 204
differential psychology inﬂuencing, 84–86, 101
disengagement stage in, 93, 96
diverse populations under, 86, 93–94, 96–97, 102,
103, 204, 223, 249–251, 280–281, 329, 371–372
empirical support for, 101–104
establishment stage in, 93, 94–95
exploration stage in, 93, 94
growth stage in, 93–94
intervention process under, 105–106
life or social role arrangement under, 98–99, 107,
622
maintenance stage in, 93, 95
on needs and values, 85–86, 422, 426–427, 428–430
overview of, 83–84, 106–107
practice implications of, 104–106, 106–107
on relational inﬂuences, 329, 346
self-concept theory inﬂuencing, 88–90, 99–101, 103
Social Cognitive Career Theory comparison to,
116–117
Maslow, Abraham/Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,
2–3, 4, 5, 149, 419, 420
Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 285
‘‘Me Incorporated’’ philosophy, 22–23, 150
Men, gender issues for. See Gender differences and
equity
Mental health:
career and personal counseling overlap
addressing, 15–16, 16–17, 18–19
career transition relationship to, 655, 658–659, 660,
662–663, 664, 669, 674, 677
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 44, 46
therapeutic assessment approach addressing, 405
work impacting, 5, 18–19
workplace harassment impacting, 200
Mental health counselors, 20
Mentoring, 14, 338, 340, 344, 541
Middle School Self-Efﬁcacy Scale, 484
Minnesota Ability Estimates Questionnaire, 403–404
Minnesota Importance Questionnaire, 39, 49, 419,
422, 424–426, 434–436, 440
Minnesota Mechanical Ability Tests, 451
Minnesota Occupational Classiﬁcation System, 50,
516
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire, 40, 625, 632
Minnesota Satisfactoriness Scales, 41, 634
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment, 29–50

703

on ability and aptitude, 32–34, 37, 38, 44–45,
46–47, 48, 49, 452
applications of, 43–49
assessments under, 38–41, 49, 388, 418, 421–422,
424–426, 428–430, 434–436, 452
on career transitions, 44–45, 664
case example applying, 47–49
core concepts of, 30–41
diverse populations under, 35, 42–43, 45–47, 50,
202–203, 220–222, 248–249, 279–280, 368
on interests, 38–39, 388
life span duration of, 44–45
on needs and values, 30, 32–34, 38, 39–40, 44–45,
46–47, 48–49, 221, 418, 421–422, 424–426,
428–430, 434–436
organizational-level interventions under, 45–47
overview of, 29–30, 31–32, 49–50
practice implications of, 43–49, 49–50
predictive model of, 30, 32–35
process model of, 30, 35–38
research support for, 41–43
on work satisfaction and performance, 32–38,
40–50, 221, 621–622, 628, 642
Missouri Occupational Card Sort, 73
Modeling, in interventions, 572. See also Role models
Monetary issues. See Socioeconomic factors; Wages
Motivated Skills Card Sort-Revised, 459
Murray, Henry, 419
Myers-briggs type indicator–3rd edition, 489, 491
My Next Move website, 519, 521, 528
My Vocational Situation, 63, 482–483, 493
National Career Development Association, 24, 88,
509, 517, 526
National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS),
333
National Gay and Lesbian Chamber of Commerce,
290–291
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 197, 199
National Longitudinal Transition Study (NLTS), 358
National Survey of Working America, 653–654
National Vocational Guidance Association, 88, 517
Needs and values:
assessment of, 39–40, 49, 85–86, 137, 417–441, 468
career counseling application of need/value
assessments, 434–441
conceptual distinctions between, 419–424
content domains of values, 424–430
gender differences in, 433, 441
individual differences in, 430–434
interests relationship to, 423–424, 551–552
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 85–86,
422, 426–427, 428–430
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 2–3, 4, 5, 149, 419, 420
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 30,
32–34, 38, 39–40, 44–45, 46–47, 48–49, 221,
418, 421–422, 424–426, 428–430, 434–436
O*NET value measures, 39, 49, 418, 425, 434–435,
436–438, 441
overview of, 417–419
person-environment perspective on, 430–431
racial and ethnic inﬂuences on, 226–227, 433–434
relational inﬂuences on, 335
Schwartz’s circumplex model of values on, 422,
427–428, 430
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 117, 121
stability and change of, 431–433
values card sorts, 40, 523

704

Subject Index

Needs and values (Continued)
work as need fulﬁllment, 2–3
work satisfaction and performance inﬂuenced by,
431, 435, 441
work vs. life values, 422–423, 439–440
NEO-Five Factor Inventory, 316, 490
NEO Personality Inventory-Revised, 490–491
Networking, in job searches, 597, 599–600
Neuroticism or emotional stability, 302, 317–318,
321–322, 489–491, 607–608
No Child Left Behind Act (2001), 461
Occupation, 6, 8. See also Work; career-related entries
Occupational health psychology, 20
Occupational information resources:
career choices facilitated via, 529
Career Cruising, 524–525, 529
computer-assisted career guidance systems, 106,
522–525, 527–530, 575–576
Dictionary of Holland Occupational Codes (DHOC),
57, 63, 71, 74, 397, 514
Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 516, 517, 518
Educational Opportunities Finder, 57, 71, 397–398
ethical issues in use of, 525–527
exploration via, 527–528
Holland’s Hexagon, 513–514 (see also Dictionary of
Holland Occupational Codes)
intoCareers, 522–523, 528, 530
Leisure Activities Finder, The, 73
LGBT career-speciﬁc, 290–291
Minnesota Occupational Classiﬁcation System, 50,
516
My Next Move, 519, 521, 528
occupational classiﬁcation systems, 50, 71, 175,
512–516
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 517–518, 526, 528
Occupations Finder, 57, 71
online occupational information databases, 39, 49,
50, 59, 71, 175, 418, 425, 434–435, 436–438,
441, 451, 452, 467–468, 513, 514, 516, 518–522,
524
overview of, 507–509
practical applications of, 527–530, 572
professional journals, 19, 102, 235, 285
research on importance and use of, 509–512
SIGI3 , 523–524
sources of, 516–525
Standard Occupational Classiﬁcation System,
512–513
World-of-Work Map, 514–516
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 517–518, 526, 528
Occupational sociology, 20
Occupations Finder, 57, 71
One Stop Career Centers, 367, 376
O*NET databases:
ability proﬁler, 451, 452, 467–468, 524
computer-assisted career guidance systems using,
522, 524
Dictionary of Occupational Titles replaced by, 517,
518
interest proﬁler, 514, 522
occupational classiﬁcation system employed in, 71,
175, 513, 514, 516
as source of occupational information, 59, 175,
518–522
values measures, 39, 49, 418, 425, 434–435,
436–438, 441
Openness, 303, 319, 320, 489–491, 640

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) study, 197
Organizational citizenship behaviors, 635–637,
638–640, 643–646
Out and Equal Workplace Advocates, 291
Outcome expectations:
assessment of, 485–486, 497
child and adolescent, 552–553
disabilities impacting, 369
job search behaviors inﬂuencing, 606–607,
608–609, 611–613
LGBT status impacting, 284
race and ethnicity inﬂuencing, 233–234
relational inﬂuences on, 329, 332, 336
Social Cognitive Career Theory recognition of,
118–131, 134–138, 141–144, 205, 225, 252,
369, 485–486, 497, 643
socioeconomic factors impacting, 259–261, 540
Parsons, Frank, 21, 29, 507, 548
Peers:
job search support via, 597, 599–600, 609–610
relational inﬂuences of, 331, 337–338
work readiness skills learned via, 547
Perceptions of Barriers Scale, 495–496
Performance. See Work satisfaction and performance
Persistence/perseverance, 35, 36, 67–68, 126, 131
Personal counseling or psychotherapy, career
counseling vs., 15–16, 16–17, 18–19
Personal goals:
assessment of, 486–487
career choice goal setting, 139–140
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
162–163
relational inﬂuences on, 329
Social Cognitive Career Theory recognition of, 119,
139–140, 143, 486–487
Personality factors:
agreeableness as, 303, 320, 489–491, 607, 640
assessment of, 57, 66, 70, 73, 74, 304–306, 316,
489–493, 497
career conﬁdence inﬂuenced by, 311–312
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
153–155, 175
career decidedness inﬂuenced by, 310–311
career development impacted by, 299–323
career exploration inﬂuenced by, 307
career outcomes across life span relationship to,
306–315
career planning inﬂuenced by, 310
conscientiousness as, 303–304, 318–319, 322,
489–491, 640, 643
diverse populations displaying, 66, 67, 75–76,
203–204, 219–220, 248–249, 277–278
educational and career aspirations inﬂuenced by,
309–310
extraversion as, 300, 302–303, 319–320, 489–491,
640
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on types of, 56–77, 153–155, 175,
219–220, 248–249, 277–278, 308, 388, 390,
391, 395, 396–398, 490, 513–514, 628, 642
interests inﬂuenced by, 56–57, 66, 203–204,
307–308, 388, 390, 391, 392, 395, 396–398
job ﬁnding, satisfaction and success inﬂuenced by,
312–315
job searches inﬂuenced by, 607–608
of LGBT individuals, 277–278

Subject Index

life outcomes relationship to, 300–301
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 35, 43
neuroticism or emotional stability as, 302, 317–318,
321–322, 489–491, 607–608
openness as, 303, 319, 320, 489–491, 640
overview of, 299–300
practice implications of, 315–323
research on, 64–69, 299, 301, 304–315, 315–323
RIASEC personality types, 56–77, 153–155, 175,
219–220, 248–249, 277–278, 308, 388, 390,
391, 395, 396–398, 490, 513–514, 628, 642
Social Cognitive Career Theory recognition of,
128–129
stability of, 65–66, 304–306
structure and stability of normal personality,
301–306
vocational identity development inﬂuenced by, 309
work satisfaction and performance inﬂuenced by,
68, 73–75, 128–129, 220, 312–315, 626–627,
628, 631, 640–641, 642, 643, 646
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act (1996), 259
Personal Styles Scale, 489, 492–493
Person-environment vocational ﬁt theories. See
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment; Minnesota Theory of Work
Adjustment
Placement, 14
PLAN test, 462–463, 514
Plato, 85, 449
Position Classiﬁcation Inventory, 57, 74
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, 632
Positive psychology movement, 44
Poverty. See Socioeconomic factors
Problem-solving appraisal skills, 579
Project HOPE, 263
Promotion. See Career counseling, promotion and
interventions
Psychological health. See Mental health
Psychology of working perspective, 255–256
Psychotherapy or personal counseling, career
counseling vs., 15–16, 16–17, 18–19
Race and ethnicity:
acculturation of, 228–229
assessment-related cultural differences based on,
410–411, 433–434, 457–458, 498
barrier and support perceptions based on, 232–233
career choices inﬂuenced by, 217–218, 226–234
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
223–224
career counseling effectiveness inﬂuenced by,
577–579
career development impacted by, 215–238
career development theories on, 42–43, 66, 67,
122–123, 132, 133, 203, 218–225
cultural factors based on, 226–234
cultural values based on, 226–227
discrimination perceptions based on, 231–232, 345
educational and occupational disparities based on,
216–218
ethnic identity, 229–230, 236
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 222–223
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 66, 67, 218–220
interests inﬂuenced by, 410–411
job searches impacted by, 601, 604–605, 610–611,
615

705

Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers on, 223
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 42–43,
203, 220–222
needs and values inﬂuenced by, 226–227, 433–434
occupational aspirations and expectations
inﬂuenced by, 233–234
overview of, 215–216, 237–238
practice implications of, 234–238, 577–579, 585
racial harassment, 200
relational inﬂuences among minorities, 333–334,
336, 337, 338, 341, 345
research on, 218–234, 236–237
role models for minorities, 230–231
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 122–123, 132,
133, 224–225
socioeconomic factors impacted by, 254
STEM career disparities of, 218, 225, 228, 230
Relational inﬂuences:
in adulthood, 341–348
assessment of social support and, 488–489
career development impacted by, 138–139,
329–350
career development theories on, 329–330, 346–347,
488
on career transitions, 670, 674
in childhood through young adulthood, 331–341
client-counselor working alliance as, 574–575
of family, 331, 332–335, 336–337
on job searches, 597, 599–600, 609–610
on LGBT individuals, 284–285, 289–290, 345
of mentors, 338, 340, 344
networking using, 597, 599–600
overview of, 329–331, 348–350
of peers, 331, 337–338
practice implications of, 339–341, 346–350
relational violence, bullying or discrimination as,
338–339, 343–344, 345–346
of role models (see Role models)
on self-efﬁcacy beliefs, 329, 332, 333, 335, 336, 344
socioeconomic factors and, 334, 336, 337, 341
of teachers, 331, 335–337, 339–340
work-family interface and, 342–343
Republic, The (Plato), 85
Reputation, 152–153, 154
Research:
assessment-based (see Assessments)
on career counseling and development, 23–24,
584–587, 667–671
on career transitions, 667–671
on gender differences and equity, 190, 192–195,
196, 197, 199–201
on Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment, 64–69
on Integrative Contextual Model of Career
Development, 553–554
on Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers,
101–104
on Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment, 41–43
on occupational information importance and use,
509–512
on personality factors, 64–69, 299, 301, 304–315,
315–323
on race and ethnicity, 218–234, 236–237
on Social Cognitive Career Theory, 129–133
Resources. See Occupational information resources
Resumes, job searches using, 602–603
Retirement:
career transitions toward, 657
encore careers instead of, 96

706

Subject Index

Retirement (Continued)
interest assessments for, 394
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers
disengagement stage during, 93, 96
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on
adjustment to, 45
RIASEC personality types. See also Holland’s Theory
of Vocational Choice and Adjustment
applications of, 69–76
assessment of, 57, 66, 70, 73, 74, 490
Career Construction Theory and Practice
inﬂuenced by, 153–155, 175
congruence of, 59–60, 67–68, 71–72, 74–75, 76–77,
220, 395
consistency of, 61–63, 68, 73, 77, 220
description of, 56–59
differentiation of, 60–61, 68, 71, 72–73, 75, 77, 220
in diverse populations, 66, 67, 75–76, 203–204,
219–220, 248–249, 277–278
existence of, 65
identity based on, 63–64, 68–69, 75, 77
interests inﬂuenced by, 56–57, 66, 203–204, 308,
388, 390, 391, 395, 396–398
occupational classiﬁcation systems based on,
513–514
predictions based on relationship among, 59–64,
67–69
research on, 64–69
stability of, 65–66
work satisfaction and performance inﬂuenced by,
68, 73–75, 220, 628, 642
Rogers, Carl, 88, 405–406
Role models:
Career Construction Theory and Practice on, 152,
169, 173, 174–175
career counseling and intervention use of, 572
gender-based, 135, 193, 195, 198
racial and ethnic, 230–231
sexual identity-based, 284–285, 289
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 125, 127, 132,
135
Salience Inventory, 99, 103, 104, 105, 488
San Juan, Juan Huarte de, 449
SAT aptitude test, 463–464
Satisfaction. See Work satisfaction and performance
Schools and education:
ability and aptitude assessments inﬂuenced by, 458
bullying or violence in, 339
career academies for, 340
career awareness, development and school success
promotion, 11, 75–76, 134–136, 539–557
career counseling professional qualiﬁcations and,
19–20
career services provided in, 13–14, 166–168
career transitions impacted by level of, 654–655,
656–657, 674
continuing education and training improving
work skills, 646, 654, 674, 675
educational psychologists in, 20
job searches impacted by educational level, 611
needs and values development during, 432–433,
441
occupational information resources available in
(see Occupational information resources)
personality factors inﬂuencing educational
aspirations, 309–310
racial and ethnic disparities in, 216–218
relational inﬂuences in and on, 331–341
school or college counselors in, 20, 339–340

school-to-school or school-to-work transitioning,
550–551, 656–657, 669
self-regulated learning promoted through, 552
socioeconomic factors impacting, 253–254,
259–260, 262, 264–265
special education for youth with disabilities, 358,
360, 362–363, 364–365
vocational developmental tasks in, 156
wages tied to level of, 654
work readiness skills learned in, 547
School-to-Work Opportunities Act, 550
Schwartz’s circumplex model of values, 422,
427–428, 430
Selection, optimization, and compensation (SOC)
model of adult development, 666
Self-concept theory:
on ability and aptitude, 89, 458–460, 471
developing, implementing and adjusting self
under, 99–101
on interests, 89, 389
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers inﬂuenced
by, 88–90, 99–101, 103
on vocational identity, 482–483
work as personal identity or self-construction
under, 3–4, 361
Self-determination theory, 370–371
Self Directed Search:
ability and aptitude assessment via, 459
interest assessment via, 396–398, 407
occupational classiﬁcation schema in, 513–514
personality assessment via, 57, 70
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs:
ability and aptitude assessments inﬂuencing,
458–460, 465, 466–467
assessment of, 483–485, 495–496, 497
career transition relationship to, 665–666, 673
children and adolescents developing positive,
career-related, 543–545
disabilities impacting, 369–370, 373–374
gender differences in, 130, 132–133, 194, 196, 205,
540
job searches inﬂuenced by, 608–609
LGBT status impacting, 284
personality factors impacting, 311–312, 315
racial and ethnic differences in, 229, 230, 233
relational inﬂuences on, 329, 332, 333, 335, 336, 344
Social Cognitive Career Theory recognition of, 118,
120–138, 140–144, 205, 225, 252, 369–370,
483–485, 497, 628–629, 642–643, 665–666, 673
socioeconomic factors impacting, 252, 255, 260,
265, 540
work satisfaction and performance inﬂuenced by,
628–629, 642–643, 646
Self-making, 148–150, 154–155
Self-regulation skills, 139–140, 552, 609
Serviceman’s Readjustment Act (1944), 517
Sexual harassment, gender-based, 199–200
Sexual identity, 276, 280–282, 283–291. See also
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals
Sexual orientation, 276. See also Lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender individuals
SIGI3 (system for interactive guidance information),
523–524
Simon, Theodore, 450
Skills. See Ability and aptitude
Skills Conﬁdence Inventory, 397, 483, 514
Social capital, relationships creating, 330
Social class. See Socioeconomic factors
Social class worldview model, 256–257

Subject Index

Social Cognitive Career Theory, 115–144
on ability and aptitude, 117, 121, 126–128, 642–643
applications of, 134–142, 142–144
assessments in, 137–138, 389, 483–487, 488, 497
on career choices, 115, 123–126, 136–142
career theory comparison with, 116–117, 142
on career transitions, 665–666, 673
cognitive-person elements of, 117–119
diverse populations under, 115–116, 122–123,
125–126, 128–129, 130, 131–133, 134–136,
205, 224–225, 251–252, 282–285, 329, 368–370
on goal setting, 119, 139–140, 143, 486–487
on interests, 115, 117, 120–123, 124–126, 130,
134–136, 137–138, 143, 389
models of, 120–129
on needs and values, 117, 121
on outcome expectations, 118–131, 134–138,
141–144, 205, 225, 252, 369, 485–486, 497, 643
overview of, 115–129, 142–144
on persistence/perseverance, 126, 131
practice implications of, 134–142, 142–144
on relational inﬂuences, 329, 346–347, 488
research on, 129–133
on self-efﬁcacy beliefs, 118, 120–138, 140–144, 205,
225, 252, 369–370, 483–485, 497, 628–629,
642–643, 665–666, 673
on work satisfaction and performance, 115,
126–129, 131, 140–142, 628–629, 642–643
Social constructionism, 148–149
Social justice:
career development ﬁeld’s role in, 24–25, 349–350,
589
gender equity promoting, 188, 207
LGBT counseling addressing, 289
Social learning theories, 251–252, 282–285
Social relationships. See Relational inﬂuences
Social roles. See Life roles
Social Security Administration, 357, 360–361, 362,
366, 376
Social Support Behaviors measure, 488–489
Social workers, 20
Society of Vocational Psychology, 24
Socioeconomic factors:
assessments inﬂuenced by, 255, 261, 458
barriers to working with poor, 257–258, 262–263
career aspirations and outcome expectations
impacted by, 259–261, 540
Career Construction Theory and Practice on,
249–251
career development impacted by, 245–268
career development theories on, 122, 125–126, 132,
247–253
classism based on, 255–258
differential status identity perspective on, 255
disability-related issues impacting, 357–358, 361,
362, 366, 376
education impacted by, 253–254, 259–260, 262,
264–265
employment obtainment impacted by, 261–263,
265–266
gender issues impacting, 187, 197–198, 199
Gottfredson’s Theory of Circumscription and
Compromise on, 249–251
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 248–249
job searches inﬂuenced by, 609
Life-Span, Life-Space Theory of Careers, 249–251
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on,
248–249
overview of, 245–247, 267–268

707

practice implications of, 264–268, 584–585
psychology of working perspective on, 255–256
relational inﬂuences and, 334, 336, 337, 341
self-efﬁcacy beliefs impacted by, 252, 255, 260, 265,
540
social class worldview model on, 256–257
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 122, 125–126,
132, 251–252
social learning theories on, 251–252
sociological perspectives on, 253–255
wages as (see Wages)
work-life balance impacted by, 201–202
work satisfaction and performance impacted by,
263–264
Soldiers Rehabilitation Act (1918), 363
Spearman, Charles, 450
Standard Occupational Classiﬁcation System,
512–513
Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, 285
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 450
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math)
careers:
creating career awareness of, 541–542
gender disparities in, 187, 191, 192–195, 205, 465,
510, 548
outcome expectations for, 485
racial and ethnic disparities in, 218, 225, 228, 230
Stereotypes:
gender-based, 189–191, 192–193, 203–204, 206,
510, 548–549
occupational, 189–191, 510, 540, 541, 548–549
sexual identity, 285, 288, 289
Strong, E. K., Jr., 392, 393, 410
Strong Interest Inventory:
interest assessment via, 22, 57, 66, 106, 396–397,
398–401, 402–403, 407, 410
occupational classiﬁcation schema in, 514
personal styles or personality factors assessed via,
489, 492–493
Student Strengths Inventory, 523
Study of Values, 419, 421
Super, Donald E., 3, 6, 10, 23, 40, 84–90, 96, 98, 101,
104, 106, 149, 150, 155, 204, 223, 249, 329, 331,
371, 420, 422, 426–427, 438, 479, 540. See also
Career-development assessment and
counseling (C-DAC) model; Life-Span,
Life-Space Theory of Careers
Super’s Work Values Inventory-Revised, 438–439
Support scale, 489
Teachers, relational inﬂuences of, 331, 335–337,
339–340. See also Schools and education
Technology. See Computers
Terman, Lewis, 450
Theories of career development. See Career
development theories
Therapeutic assessment approach, 405
Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement
Act (1999), 366
Transgenderism, 275, 276, 286–288. See also Lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender individuals
Unisex Edition of ACT Interest Inventory
(UNIACT), 57, 400, 410, 514, 515
University of Minnesota, 39. See also
Minnesota-related entries
U.S. Department of Defense, Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery, 57, 451, 468–469
U.S. Department of Education, Career Clusters, 484,
523

708

Subject Index

U.S. Department of Labor:
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 358, 507, 517, 654
Career Onestop, 519
Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 516, 517, 518
General Aptitude Test Battery, 22, 451
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 517–518, 526, 528
O*NET databases by, 39, 49, 59, 71, 175, 418, 425,
434–435, 436–438, 441, 451, 452, 467–468,
513, 514, 516, 518–522, 524
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC), 200
U.S. Social Security Administration, 357, 360–361,
362, 366, 376
U.S. Veterans Administration, 21, 517
UtahFutures, 523
Values. See Needs and values
Values Scale, 86, 103, 105, 106, 438–440
Value Survey, 421
Veterans, career transitions of, 21, 363, 517, 658–659,
661, 662, 670
Veterans Administration, 21, 517
Violence or bullying, relational inﬂuences of,
338–339, 343–344, 345–346
Vocation, deﬁnition of, 8–9
Vocational identity:
assessment of, 481, 482–483, 496–497
children and adolescents forming, 545–546
personality factors inﬂuencing development of, 309
Vocational Identity Scale, 481, 482–483
Vocational Preference Inventory, 57
Vocational psychology, 19–20. See also Career
counseling, promotion and interventions
Vocational Rehabilitation Amendments (1954),
363–364
Voice, work performance including, 637, 638,
639–640, 645
Volunteer positions, job searches via, 601
Wages:
career transition ﬂuctuation of, 655, 657, 658, 659,
660, 662
disability-related issues impacting, 357–358, 361,
362, 366, 376
education level inﬂuencing, 654
gender differences in, 187, 197–198, 199
Web-based activities. See Computers
What Color is Your Parachute? (Bolles), 70
Women, gender issues for. See Gender differences
and equity
Work. See also career-related entries
advertisements for, 597–599
alternate terms related to, 6, 8–9
children and adolescents developing work
readiness skills, 546–548
children and adolescents understanding work
world and personal role in work world,
548–551
identity through, 3–4, 361
interviews for, 603–605
life roles’ intersection with, 5–6, 98–99, 107,
342–343, 622
loss of, 660, 670 (see also Career transitions)
mental health impacts of, 5, 18–19
psychology of working perspective on, 255–256
reasons and motivations for, 2–7, 375–376
resources on (see Occupational information
resources)

resume summarizing past, 602–603
retirement after, 45, 93, 96, 394, 657
satisfaction and performance (see Work satisfaction
and performance)
searches for (see Job searches)
wages from (see Wages)
work-life balance issues, 12–13, 98, 201–202
work vs. life values, 422–423, 439–440
Workbook/written exercises, in interventions, 571
Workforce demographics. See Demographics and
diversity of workforce
Workforce Investment Act (1998), 360, 366–367
Work Hope Scale, 261
Work Importance Locator, 425, 437–438, 516
Work Importance Proﬁler, 39, 49, 425, 436–437, 440,
516
Work Importance Study, 102, 103, 426–427
Working Conditions Value Scale, 426
Work satisfaction and performance:
ability and aptitude inﬂuencing, 467, 471, 547,
640–641, 642–643, 646
adaptive performance, 637–638
assessment of, 40–41, 625–626, 630–633, 634,
643–646
counterproductive behaviors impacting, 637, 638,
644–646
deﬁnitions and frames of reference for, 633–634,
634–635
gender inﬂuences on, 200–201
Holland’s Theory of Vocational Choice and
Adjustment on, 68, 73–75, 220, 628, 642
interest congruence with, 394–396
Minnesota Theory of Work Adjustment on, 32–38,
40–50, 221, 621–622, 628, 642
multiple dimensions of performance, 635–640
needs and values inﬂuencing, 431, 435, 441
organizational citizenship behaviors in, 635–637,
638–640, 643–646
overview of, 621–623, 646–647
personality factors inﬂuencing, 68, 73–75, 128–129,
220, 312–315, 626–627, 628, 631, 640–641,
642, 643, 646
practice implications for, 629–633, 643–646
promotion of, 12, 73–75, 140–142, 621–647
satisfaction, speciﬁcally, 623–633
satisfactoriness or performance, speciﬁcally,
633–646
Social Cognitive Career Theory on, 115, 126–129,
131, 140–142, 628–629, 642–643
socioeconomic factors impacting, 263–264
sources of job satisfaction/dissatisfaction,
626–629, 630, 631
sources of job satisfactoriness/unsatisfactoriness,
640–643
statistics on, 624–625
supervisor’s appraisal of, 638–640
task and contextual performance, 635–637, 639, 641
working conditions and environment inﬂuencing,
627–628, 631, 641–642
work readiness skills impacting, 547
Work Values Inventory, 40, 86, 422, 438–439
World-of-Work Map, 514–516
World Wars I and II, 21–22, 405, 450–451

Year to Career program, 669
Youth. See Children and adolescents; Disabilities,
youth and young adults with
Youth Development Study, 262

